## NOTEBOOK V

#### 22 January -- Beginning of February 1858

# The Chapter on Capital (continuation)

With its coming-together in the city, the commune possesses an economic existence as such; the city's mere *presence,* as such, distinguishes it from a mere multiplicity of independent houses. The whole, here, consists not merely of its parts. It is a kind of independent organism. Among the Germanic tribes, where the individual family chiefs settled in the forests, long distances apart, the commune exists, already from *outward* observation, only in the periodic gathering-together \[*Vereinigung*\] of the commune members, although their unity-*in-itself* is posited in their ancestry, language, common past and history, etc. The *commune* thus appears as a *coming-together* \[*Vereinigung*\], not as a *being-together* \[*Verein*\]; as a unification made up of independent subjects, landed proprietors, and not as a unity. The commune therefore does not in fact exist as a *state* or *political body,* as in classical antiquity, because it does not exist as a *city.* For the commune to come into real existence, the free landed proprietors have to hold a *meeting,* whereas e.g. in Rome it *exists* even apart from these assemblies in the existence of the *city itself* and of the officials presiding over it etc. True, the *ager publicus,* the communal or people's land, as distinct from individual property, also occurs among the Germanic tribes. It takes the form of hunting land, grazing land, timber land etc., the part of the land which cannot be divided if it is to serve as means of production in this specific form. But this *ager publicus* does not appear, as with the Romans e.g., as the particular economic presence of the state as against the private proprietors, so that these latter are actually *private* proprietors as such, in so far as they are *excluded,* deprived, like the plebeians, from using the *ager publicus*. Among the Germanic tribes, the *ager publicus* appears rather merely as a complement to individual property, and figures as property only to the extent that it is defended militarily as the common property of one tribe against a hostile tribe. []{#p484} Individual property does not appear mediated by the commune; rather, the existence of the commune and of communal property appear as mediated by, i.e. as a relation of, the independent subjects to one another. The economic totality is, at bottom, contained in each individual household, which forms an independent centre of production for itself (manufactures purely as domestic secondary task for women etc.). In the world of antiquity, the city with its territory is the economic totality; in the Germanic world, the totality is the individual residence, which itself appears as only a small dot on the land belonging to it, and which is not a concentration of many proprietors, but the family as independent unit. In the Asiatic form (at least, predominantly), the individual has no property but only possession; the real proprietor, proper, is the commune -- hence property only as *communal property* in land. In antiquity (Romans as the most classic example, the thing in its purest, most fully developed form), the form of state property in land and that of private property in land \[are\] antithetical, so that the latter is mediated by the former, or the former itself exists in this double form. The private proprietor of land hence at the same time urban citizen. Urban citizenship resolves itself economically into the simple form that the agriculturist \[is a\] resident of a city. In the Germanic form, the agriculturist not citizen of a state, i.e. not inhabitant of a city; \[the\] basis \[is\] rather the isolated, independent family residence, guaranteed by the bond with other such family residences of the same tribe, and by their occasional coming-together \[*Zusammnenkommen*\] to pledge each others' allegiance in war, religion, adjudication etc. Individual landed property here appears neither as a form antithetical to the commune's landed property, nor as mediated by it, but just the contrary. The commune exists only in the interrelations among these individual landed proprietors as such. Communal property as such appears only as a communal accessory to the individual tribal seats and the land they appropriate. The commune is neither the substance of which the individual appears as a mere accident; nor is it a generality with a *being and unity* as such \[*seiende Einheit*\] either in the mind and in the existence of the city and of its civic needs as distinct from those of the individual, or in its civic land and soil as its particular presence as distinct from the particular economic presence of the commune member; rather, the commune, on the one side, is presupposed in-itself prior to the individual proprietors as a communality of language, blood etc., but it exists as a presence, on the other []{#p485} hand, only in its *real assembly* for communal purposes; and to the extent that it has a particular economic existence in the hunting and grazing lands for communal use, it is so used by each individual proprietor as such, not as representative of the state (as in Rome); it is really the common property of the individual proprietors, not of the union of these proprietors endowed with an existence separate from themselves, the city itself.

The main point here is this: In all these forms -- in which landed property and agriculture form the basis of the economic order, and where the economic aim is hence the production of use values, i.e. the *reproduction of the individual* within the specific relation to the commune in which he is its basis -- there is to be found: (1) Appropriation not through labour, but presupposed to labour; appropriation of the natural conditions of labour, of the *earth* as the original instrument of labour as well as its workshop and repository of raw materials. The individual relates simply to the objective conditions of labour as being his; \[relates\] to them as the inorganic nature of his subjectivity, in which the latter realizes itself; the chief objective condition of labour does not itself appear as a *product* of labour, but is already there as *nature;* on one side the living individual, on the other the earth, as the objective condition of his reproduction; (2) but this *relation* to land and soil, to the earth, as the property of the labouring individual -- who thus appears from the outset not merely as labouring individual, in this abstraction, but who has an *objective mode of existence* in his ownership of the land, an existence *presupposed* to his activity, and not merely as a result of it, a presupposition of his activity just like his skin, his sense organs, which of course he also reproduces and develops etc. in the life process, but which are nevertheless presuppositions of this process of his reproduction -- is instantly mediated by the naturally arisen, spontaneous, more or less historically developed and modified presence of the individual as *member of a commune --* his naturally arisen presence as member of a tribe etc. An isolated individual could no more have property in land and soil than he could speak. He could, of course, live off it as substance, as do the animals. The relation to the earth as property is always mediated through the occupation of the land and soil, peacefully or violently, by the tribe, the commune, in some more or less naturally arisen or already historically developed form. The individual can never appear here in the dot-like isolation \[*Punktualität*\] in which he appears as mere free worker. If the objective []{#p486} conditions of his labour are presupposed as belonging to him, then he himself is subjectively presupposed as member of a commune, through which his relation to land and soil is mediated. His relation to the objective conditions of labour is mediated through his presence as member of the commune; at the same time, the real presence of the commune is determined by the specific form of the individual's property in the objective conditions of labour. Whether this property mediated by commune-membership appears as *communal property,* where the individual is merely the possessor and there is no private property in land and soil -- or whether property appears in the double form of state and private property alongside one another, but so that the latter appears as posited by the former, so that only the citizen is and must be a private proprietor, while his property as citizen has a separate, particular existence at the same time -- or whether, finally, the communal property appears only as a complement to individual property, with the latter as the base, while the commune has no existence for-itself except in the *assembly* of the commune members, their coming-together for common purposes -- these different forms of the commune or tribe members' relation to the tribe's land and soil -- to the earth where it has settled -- depend partly on the natural inclinations of the tribe, and partly on the economic conditions in which it relates as proprietor to the land and soil in reality, i.e. in which it appropriates its fruits through labour, and the latter will itself depend on climate, physical make-up of the land and soil, the physically determined mode of its exploitation, the relation with hostile tribes or neighbour tribes, and the modifications which migrations, historic experiences etc. introduce. The survival of the commune as such in the old mode requires the reproduction of its members in the presupposed objective conditions. Production itself, the advance of population (this too belongs with production), necessarily suspends these conditions little by little; destroys them instead of reproducing them etc., and, with that, the communal system declines and falls, together with the property relations on which it was based. The Asiatic form necessarily hangs on most tenaciously and for the longest time. This is due to its presupposition that the individual does not become independent *vis-à-vis* the commune; that there is a self-sustaining circle of production, unity of agriculture and manufactures, etc. If the individual changes his relation to the commune, he thereby changes and acts destructively upon the commune; as on its economic presup[]{#p487}position; on the other side, the alteration of this economic presupposition brought about by its own dialectic -- impoverishment etc. In particular, the influence of warfare and of conquest, which e.g. in Rome belonged to the essential conditions of the commune itself, suspends the real bond on which it rests. In all these forms, the *reproduction of presupposed* relations -- more or less naturally arisen or historic as well, but become traditional -- of the individual to his commune, together with a *specific, objective* existence, *predetermined* for the individual, of his relations both to the conditions of labour and to his co-workers, fellow tribesmen etc. -- are the foundation of development, which is therefore from the outset *restricted,* but which signifies decay, decline and fall once this barrier is suspended. Thus among the Romans, the development of slavery, the concentration of land possession, exchange, the money system, conquest etc., although all these elements up to a certain point seemed compatible with the foundation, and in part appeared merely as innocent extensions of it, partly grew out of it as mere abuses. Great developments can take place here within a specific sphere. The individuals may appear great. But there can be no conception here of a free and full development either of the individual or of the society, since such development stands in contradiction to the original relation.

Do we never find in antiquity an inquiry into which form of landed property etc. is the most productive, creates the greatest wealth? Wealth does not appear as the aim of production, although Cato may well investigate which manner of cultivating a field brings the greatest rewards, and Brutus may even lend out his money at the best rates of interest.[^1] The question is always which mode of property creates the best citizens. Wealth appears as an end in itself only among the few commercial peoples -- monopolists of the carrying trade -- who live in the pores of the ancient world, like the Jews in medieval society. Now, wealth is on one side a thing, realized in things, material products, which a human being confronts as subject; on the other side, as value, wealth is merely command over alien labour not with the aim of ruling, but with the aim of private consumption etc. It appears in all forms in the shape of a thing, be it an object or be it a relation mediated through the object, which is external and accidental to the individual. Thus the old view, in which the human being appears as the aim of []{#p488} production, regardless of his limited national, religious, political character, seems to be very lofty when contrasted to the modern world, where production appears as the aim of mankind and wealth as the aim of production. In fact, however, when the limited bourgeois form is stripped away, what is wealth other than the universality of individual needs, capacities, pleasures, productive forces etc., created through universal exchange? The full development of human mastery over the forces of nature, those of so-called nature as well as of humanity's own nature? The absolute working-out of his creative potentialities, with no presupposition other than the previous historic development, which makes this totality of development, i.e. the development of all human powers as such the end in itself, not as measured on a *predetermined yardstick?* Where he does not reproduce himself in one specificity, but produces his totality? Strives not to remain something he has become, but is in the absolute movement of becoming? In bourgeois economics -- and in the epoch of production to which it corresponds -- this complete working-out of the human content appears as a complete emptying-out, this universal objectification as total alienation, and the tearing-down of all limited, one-sided aims as sacrifice of the human end-in-itself to an entirely external end. This is why the childish world of antiquity appears on one side as loftier. On the other side, it really is loftier in all matters where closed shapes, forms and given limits are sought for. It is satisfaction from a limited standpoint; while the modern gives no satisfaction; or, where it appears satisfied with itself, it is *vulgar.*

What Mr Proudhon calls the *extra-economic* origin of property, by which he understands just landed property,[^2] is the *pre-bourgeois* relation of the individual to the objective conditions of labour, and initially to the *natural* objective conditions of labour -- for, just as the working subject appears naturally as an individual, as natural being -- so does the first objective condition of his labour appear as nature, earth, as his inorganic body; he himself is not only the organic body, but also the subject of this inorganic nature. This condition is not his product but something he finds to hand -- presupposed to him as a natural being apart from him. Before we analyse this further, one more point: the worthy Proudhon would not only be able to, but would have to, accuse *capital* and *wage labour --* as forms of property -- of having an *extra-economic* origin. For the encounter with the objective conditions of labour as []{#p489} separate from him, as *capital* from the worker's side, and the encounter with the *worker* as propertyless, as an abstract worker from the capitalist's side -- the exchange such as takes place between value and living labour, presupposes a *historic process,* no matter how much capital and labour themselves reproduce this relation and work out its objective scope, as well as its depth -- a historic process, which, as we saw, forms the history of the origins of capital and wage labour. In other words: the *extra-economic origin* of property means nothing else than the *historic origin* of the bourgeois economy, of the forms of production which are theoretically or ideally expressed by the categories of political economy. But the fact that pre-bourgeois history, and each of its phases, also has its own *economy* and an *economic foundation* for its movement, is at bottom only the tautology that human life has since time immemorial rested on production, and, in one way or another, on *social* production, whose relations we call, precisely, economic relations.

*The original conditions of production* (or, what is the same, the reproduction of a growing number of human beings through the natural process between the sexes; for this reproduction, although it appears as appropriation of the objects by the subjects in one respect, appears in another respect also as formation, subjugation of the objects to a subjective purpose; their transformation into results and repositories of subjective activity) *cannot themselves* originally *be products --* results of production. It is not the *unity* of living and active humanity with the natural, inorganic conditions of their metabolic exchange with nature, and hence their appropriation of nature, which requires explanation or is the result of a historic process, but rather the *separation* between these inorganic conditions of human existence and this active existence, a separation which is completely posited only in the relation of wage labour and capital. In the relations of slavery and serfdom this separation does not take place; rather, one part of society is treated by the other as itself merely an *inorganic and natural* condition of its own reproduction. The slave stands in no relation whatsoever to the objective conditions of his labour; rather, *labour* itself, both in the form of the slave and in that of the serf, is classified as *an inorganic condition* of production along with other natural beings, such as cattle, as an accessory of the earth. In other words: the original conditions of production appear as natural presuppositions, *natural conditions of the producer's existence* just as his []{#p490} living body, even though he reproduces and develops it, is originally not posited by himself, but appears as the *presupposition of his self;* his own (bodily) being is a natural presupposition, which he has not posited. These *natural conditions of existence,* to which he relates as to his own inorganic body, are themselves double: (1) of a subjective and (2) of an objective nature. He finds himself a member of a family, clan, tribe etc. -- which then, in a historic process of intermixture and antithesis with others, takes on a different shape; and, as such a member, he relates to a specific nature (say, here, still earth, land, soil) as his own inorganic being, as a condition of his production and reproduction. As a natural member of the community he participates in the communal property, and has a particular part of it as his possession; just as, were he a natural Roman citizen, he would have an ideal claim (at least) to the *ager publicus* and a real one to a certain number of *iugera*[^3] of land etc. His *property,* i.e. the relation to the natural presuppositions of his production as belonging to him, as *his*, is mediated by his being himself the natural member of a community. (The abstraction of a community, in which the members have nothing in common but language etc., and barely that much, is obviously the product of much later historical conditions.) As regards the individual, it is clear e.g. that he relates even to language itself *as his own* only as the natural member of a human community. Language as the product of an individual is an impossibility. But the same holds for property.

Language itself is the product of a community, just as it is in another respect itself the presence \[*Dasein*\] of the community, a presence which goes without saying. \<Communal production and common property as they exist e.g. in Peru are evidently a *secondary* form; introduced by and inherited from conquering tribes, who, at home, had common property and communal production in the older, simpler form such as is found in India and among the Slavs. Likewise the form which we find among the Celts in Wales e.g. appears as a transplanted, *secondary* form, introduced by conquerors among the lesser, conquered tribes. The completion and systematic elaboration of these systems by a *supreme central authority* shows their later origin. Just as the feudalism introduced into England was more perfect in form than that which arose spontaneously in France.\> \<Among nomadic pastoral tribes -- and all pastoral peoples are originally migratory -- the earth appears []{#p491} like other natural conditions, in its elemental limitlessness, e.g. in the Asiatic steppes and the high plateau. It is grazed etc., consumed by the herds, from which the pastoral peoples in turn live. They relate to it as their property, although they never stabilize this property. This is the case too with the hunting grounds of the wild Indian tribes in America; the tribe regards a certain region as its hunting domain, and asserts it by force against other tribes, or tries to drive others off the domains they assert. Among the nomadic pastoral peoples, the commune is indeed constantly united; the travelling society, the caravan, the horde, and the forms of supremacy and subordination develop out of the conditions of this mode of life. What is in fact *appropriated* and *reproduced* here is not the earth but the herd; but the earth is always used *communally* at each halting place.\> The only barrier which the community can encounter in relating to the natural conditions of production -- the earth -- as to *its own property* (if we jump ahead to the settled peoples) is *another community,* which already claims it as its own inorganic body. *Warfare* is therefore one of the earliest occupations of each of these naturally arisen communities, both for the defence of their property and for obtaining new property. (We can indeed content ourselves here with speaking of land and soil as original property, for among the herding peoples property in natural products of the earth -- e.g. sheep -- is at the same time property in the pastures they wander through. In general, property in land and soil includes its organic products.) \<If human beings themselves are conquered along with the land and soil as its organic accessories, then they are equally conquered as one of the conditions of production, and in this way arises slavery and serfdom, which soon corrupts and modifies the original forms of all communities, and then itself becomes their basis. The simple construction is thereby negatively determined.\>

*Property* thus originally means no more than a human being's relation to his natural conditions of production as belonging to him, as his, as *presupposed* along with *his own being;* relations to them as *natural presuppositions* of his self, which only form, so to speak, his extended body. He actually does not relate to his conditions of production, but rather has a double existence, both subjectively as he himself, and objectively in these natural non-organic conditions of his existence. The forms of these *natural conditions of production* are double: (1) his existence as a member of a community; hence the existence of this community, which in its []{#p492} original form is a *clan* system, a more or less modified *clan* system; (2) the relation to *land and soil* mediated by the community, as *its own,* as communal landed property, at the same time *individual possession* for the individual, or in such a way that only the fruits are divided, but the land itself and the labour remain common. (However, *residences* etc., even if only the Scythians' wagons, always appear in individual possession.) A natural condition of production for the living individual is his belonging to a *naturally arisen, spontaneous society,* clan etc. This is e.g. already a condition for his language etc. His own productive existence is possible only on this condition. His subjective existence is thereby conditioned as such, just as it is conditioned by his relation to the earth as his workshop. (Property is, it is true, originally *mobile,* for mankind first seizes hold of the ready-made fruits of the earth, among whom belong e.g. the animals, and for him especially the ones that can be tamed. Nevertheless even this situation -- hunting, fishing, herding, gathering fruits from trees etc. -- always presupposes appropriation of the earth, whether for a fixed residence, or for roaming, or for animal pasture etc.)

*Property* therefore means *belonging to a clan* (community) (having subjective-objective existence in it); and, by means of the relation of this community to the land and soil, \[relating\] to the earth as the individual's inorganic body; his relation to land and soil, to the external primary condition of production -- since the earth is raw material, instrument and fruit all in one -- as to a presupposition belonging to his individuality, as modes of his presence. *We reduce this property to the relation to the conditions of production.* Why not to consumption, since the production of the individual is originally restricted to the reproduction of his own body through the appropriation of ready objects prepared by nature itself for consumption? Even where the only task is to *find* and to *discover,* this soon requires exertion, labour -- as in hunting, fishing, herding -- and production (i.e. development) of certain capacities on the part of the subject. Then also, situations in which it is possible to seize hold of the things available without any instruments whatever (i.e. products of labour destined for production), without alteration of form (which already takes place for herding) etc., are themselves transitional and in no case to be regarded as normal; nor as normal original situations. The original conditions of production, incidentally, of course include substances consumable directly, without labour; thus the consump[]{#p493}tion fund appears as s component part of the *original production fund.*

The fundamental condition of property resting on the clan system (into which the community originally resolves itself) -- to be a member of the clan -- makes the clan conquered by another clan *propertyless* and throws it among the *inorganic conditions* of the conqueror's reproduction, to which the conquering community relates as its own. Slavery and serfdom are thus only further developments of the form of property resting on the clan system. They necessarily modify all of the latter's forms. They can do this least of all in the Asiatic form. In the self-sustaining unity of manufacture and agriculture, on which this form rests, conquest is not so necessary a condition as where *landed property, agriculture* are exclusively predominant. On the other hand, since in this form the individual never becomes a proprietor but only a possessor, he is at bottom himself the property, the slave of him in whom the unity of the commune exists, and slavery here neither suspends the conditions of labour nor modifies the essential relation.

It is now clear, further, that:

Property, in so far as it is only the conscious relation -- and posited in regard to the individual by the community, and proclaimed and guaranteed as law -- to the conditions of production as *his own,* so that the producer's being appears also in the objective conditions *belonging to him --* is only realized by production itself. The real appropriation takes place not in the mental but in the real, active relation to these conditions -- in their real positing as the conditions of his subjective activity.

It is thereby also clear that *these conditions change.* Only when tribes hunt upon it does a region of the earth become a hunting domain; only cultivation of the soil posits the land as the individual's extended body. After the *city of Rome* had been built and the surrounding countryside cultivated by its citizens, the conditions of the community were different from what they had been before. The aim of all these communities is survival; i.e. *reproduction of the individuals who compose it as proprietors, i.e. in the same objective mode of existence as forms the relation among the members and at the same time therefore the commune itself.* This *reproduction, however, is at the same time necessarily new production and destruction of the old form.* For example, where each of the individuals is supposed to possess a given number of []{#p494} acres of land, the advance of population is already under way. If this is to be corrected, then colonization, and that in turn requires wars of conquest. With that, slaves etc. Also, e.g., enlargement of the *ager publicus,* and therewith the patricians who represent the community etc. Thus the preservation of the old community includes the destruction of the conditions on which it rests, turns into its opposite. If it were thought that productivity on the same land could be increased by developing the forces of production etc. (this precisely the slowest of all in traditional agriculture), then the new order would include combinations of labour, a large part of the day spent in agriculture etc., and thereby again suspend the old economic conditions of the community. Not only do the objective conditions change in the act of reproduction, e.g. the village becomes a town, the wilderness a cleared field etc., but the producers change, too, in that they bring out new qualities in themselves, develop themselves in production, transform themselves, develop new powers and ideas, new modes of intercourse, new needs and new language. The older and more traditional the mode of production itself -- and this lasts a long time in agriculture; even more in the oriental supplementation of agriculture with manufactures -- i.e. the longer the *real process* of appropriation remains constant, the more constant will be the old forms of property and hence the community generally. Where there is already a separation between the commune members as private proprietors \[on one side,\] and they themselves as the urban commune and proprietors of the commune's *territorium* \[on the other\], there the conditions already arise in which the individual can *lose* his property, i.e. the double relation which makes him both an equal citizen, a member of the community, and a *proprietor.* In the oriental form this *loss* is hardly possible, except by means of altogether external influences, since the individual member of the commune never enters into the relation of freedom towards it in which he could lose his (objective, economic) bond with it. He is rooted to the spot, ingrown. This also has to do with the combination of manufacture and agriculture, of town (village) and countryside. In classical antiquity, manufacture appears already as a corruption (business for *freedmen,* clients, aliens) etc. This development of productive labour (not bound in pure subordination to agriculture as a domestic task, labour by free men for agriculture or war only, or for religious observances, and manufactures for the community -- such as construction of []{#p495} houses, streets, temples), which necessarily develops through intercourse with aliens and slaves, through the desire to exchange the surplus product etc., dissolves the mode of production on which the community rests, and, with it, the *objective individual,* i.e. the individual defined as Roman, Greek, etc. Exchange acts in the same way; indebtedness etc.

The original unity between a particular form of community (clan) and the corresponding property in nature, or relation to the objective conditions of production as a natural being, as an objective being of the individual mediated by the commune -- this unity, which appears in one respect as the particular form of property -- has its living reality in a specific *mode of production* itself, a mode which appears both as a relation between the individuals, and as their specific active relation to inorganic nature, a specific mode of working (which is always family labour, often communal labour). The community itself appears as the first great force of production; particular kinds of production conditions (e.g. stock-breeding, agriculture), develop particular modes of production and particular forces of production, subjective, appearing as qualities of individuals, as well as objective \[ones\].

In the last analysis, their community, as well as the property based on it, resolves itself into a specific stage in the development of the productive forces of working subjects -- to which correspond their specific relations amongst one another and towards nature. Until a certain point, reproduction. Then turns into dissolution.

*Property,* then, originally means -- in its Asiatic, Slavonic, ancient classical, Germanic form -- the relation of the working (producing or self-reproducing) subject to the conditions of his production or reproduction as his own. It will therefore have different forms depending on the conditions of this production. Production itself aims at the reproduction of the producer within and together with these, his objective conditions of existence. This relation as proprietor -- not as a result but as a presupposition of labour, i.e. of production -- presupposes the individual defined as a member of a clan or community (whose property the individual himself is, up to a certain point). Slavery, bondage etc., where the worker himself appears among the natural conditions of production for a third individual or community (this is *not* the case e.g. with the general slavery of the Orient, *only* from the []{#p496}European point of view) -- i.e. property no longer the relation of the working individual to the objective conditions of labour -- is always secondary, derived, never original, although \[it is\] a necessary and logical result of property founded on the community and labour in the community. It is of course very simple to imagine that some powerful, physically dominant individual, after first having caught the animal, then catches humans in order to have them catch animals; in a word, uses human beings as another naturally occurring condition for his reproduction (whereby his own labour reduces itself to ruling) like any other natural creature. But such a notion is stupid -- correct as it may be from the standpoint of some particular given clan or commune -- because it proceeds from the development of *isolated individuals.* But human beings become individuals only through the process of history. He appears originally as a *species-being* \[*Gattungswesen*\], *clan being, herd animal --* although in no way whatever as a [ζῶον πολιτιϰόν]{lang="grc"}[^4] in the political sense. Exchange itself is a chief means of this individuation \[*Vereinzelung*\]. It makes the herd-like existence superfluous and dissolves it. Soon the matter \[has\] turned in such a way that as an individual he relates himself only to himself, while the means with which he posits himself as individual have become the making of his generality and commonness. In this community, the objective being of the individual as proprietor, say proprietor of land, is presupposed, and presupposed moreover under certain conditions which chain him to the community, or rather form a link in his chain. In bourgeois society, the worker e.g. stands there purely without objectivity, subjectively; but the thing which *stands opposite* him has now become the *true community* \[*Gemeinwesen*\],[^5] which he tries to make a meal of, and which makes a meal of him.

All forms (more or less naturally arisen, spontaneous, all at the same time however results of a historic process) in which the community presupposes its subjects in a specific objective unity with their conditions of production, or in which a specific subjective mode of being presupposes the communities themselves as conditions of production, necessarily correspond to a development of the forces of production which is only limited, and indeed limited in principle. The development of the forces of production dissolves these forms, and their dissolution is itself a development of the human productive forces. Labour begins with a certain []{#p497} foundation -- naturally arisen, spontaneous, at first -- then historic presupposition. Then, however, this foundation or presupposition is itself suspended, or posited as a vanishing presupposition which has become too confining for the unfolding of the progressing human pack.

In so far as classical landed property reappears in modern small-parcel landownership, it itself belongs to political economy and we shall come to it in the section on landed property.

(All this is to be returned to at greater depth and length.)

What we are here concerned with is this: the relation of labour to capital, or to the objective conditions of labour as capital, presupposes a process of history which dissolves the various forms in which the worker is a proprietor, or in which the proprietor works. Thus above all (1) *Dissolution* of the relation to the earth -- land and soil -- as natural condition of production -- to which he relates as to his own inorganic being; the workshop of his forces, and the domain of his will. All forms in which this property appears presuppose a *community,* whose members, although there may be formal distinctions between them, are, as members of it, *proprietors.* The original form of this property is therefore itself *direct common property (oriental form,* modified in the Slavonic; developed to the point of antithesis, but still as the secret, if antithetical, foundation in classical and Germanic property). (2) *Dissolution of the relations* in which he appears as *proprietor of the instrument.* Just as the above form of landed property presupposes a *real community,* so does this property of the worker in the instrument presuppose a particular form of the development of manufactures, namely *craft, artisan work;* bound up with it, the guild-corporation system etc. (The manufacture system of the ancient Orient can be examined under (1) already.) Here labour itself still half artistic, half end-in-itself etc. Mastery. Capitalist himself still master-journeyman. Attainment of particular skill in the work also secures possession of instrument etc. etc. Inheritability then to a certain extent of the mode of work together with the organization of work and the instrument of work. Medieval cities. Labour still as his own; definite self-sufficient development of one-sided abilities etc. (3) Included in both is the fact that he has the means of consumption in his possession before production, which are necessary for him to live as producer -- i.e. during production, *before* its completion. As proprietor of land he appears as directly provided []{#p498} with the necessary consumption fund. As master in a craft he has inherited it, earned it, saved it up, and as a youth he is first an *apprentice,* where he does not appear as an actual independent worker at all, but shares the master's fare in a patriarchal way. As journeyman (a genuine one) there is a certain communality in the consumption fund possessed by the master. While it is not the journeyman's *property* either, still, through the laws of the guild, tradition etc., at least co-possession etc. (To be gone into further.) (4) *Dissolution* likewise at the same time of the relations in which the *workers themselves,* the *living labour capacities* themselves, still belong *directly among the objective conditions of production,* and are appropriated as such -- i.e. are slaves or serfs. For capital, the worker is not a condition of production, only work is. If it can make machines do it, or even water, air, so much the better. And it does not appropriate the worker, but his labour -- not directly, but mediated through exchange.

These are, now, on one side, historic presuppositions needed before the worker can be found as a free worker, as objectless, purely subjective labour capacity confronting the objective conditions of production as his *not-property,* as *alien property,* as *value* for-itself, as capital. But the question arises, on the other side, which conditions are required so that he finds himself up against a *capital?*

\<The formula of capital, where living labour relates to the raw material as well as to the instrument and to the means of subsistence required during labour, as negatives, as not-property, *includes,* first of all, *not-land-ownership,* or, the negation of the situation in which the working individual relates to land and soil, to the earth, as his own, i.e. in which he works, produces, as proprietor of the land and soil. In the best case he relates not only as worker to the land and soil, but also as proprietor of the land and soil to himself as working subject. Ownership of land and soil potentially also includes ownership of the raw material, as well as of the primordial instrument, the earth itself, and of its spontaneous fruits. Posited in the most original form, it means relating to the earth as proprietor, and finding raw material and instrument on hand, as well as the necessaries of life created not by labour but by the earth itself. Once this relation is reproduced, secondary instruments and fruits of the earth created through labour itself appear as included with landed property in its primitive forms. This historic situation is thus first of all negated []{#p499} as a full property relation, in the worker's relation to the conditions of labour as capital. This is historic state No. I, which is negated in this relation or presupposed as historically dissolved. Secondly, however, where there is *ownership of the instrument* on the part of the worker, i.e. the worker relates to the instrument as his own, where the worker works as owner of the instrument (which at the same time presupposes the subsumption of the instrument under his individual work, i.e. a particular, limited developmental stage of the productive force of labour), where this form of the *worker as owner* or of the *working owner* is already posited as an independent form beside and apart from *landed property --* the artisan-like and urban development of labour -- not, as in the first case, as accidental to landed property and subsumed under it -- hence where the raw material and the necessaries of life are also *mediated* as the craftsman's property, mediated through his craft work, through his property in the instrument -- there a second historical stage is already presupposed beside and apart from the first, which must itself already appear significantly modified, through the *achievement of independence by this second sort of property* or by *working owners.* Since the instrument itself is already the product of labour, thus the element which constitutes property already exists as posited by labour, the community can no longer appear here in a naturally arisen, spontaneous form as in the first case -- the community on which this form of property founded -- but rather as itself already a produced, made, derived and secondary community, produced by the worker himself. It is clear that wherever ownership of the instrument is the relation to the conditions of production as property, there, in the real labour process, the instrument appears *only as a means* of individual labour; the art of really appropriating the instrument, of handling it as an instrument of labour, appears as the worker's particular skill, which posits him as the owner of the instrument. In short, the essential character of the guild-corporation system, of craft work as its subject, constituted by owners -- can be resolved into the relation to the instrument of production -- the instrument of labour as property -- as distinct from the relation to the earth, to land and soil (to the raw material as such) as one's own. That the relation to this one moment of the conditions of production constitutes the working subject as owner, makes him into a working owner, this \[is\] historic situation No. II, which by its nature can exist only as antithesis to or, if []{#p500} one will, at the same time as complement of a modified form of the first -- likewise negated in the first formula of capital. The third *possible form,* in which the worker relates as owner only to the necessaries of life, finding them on hand as the natural condition of the working subject, without relating to the land and soil, or to the instrument, or even (therefore) to labour itself as his own, is at bottom the formula of slavery and bondage, which is likewise negated, posited as a historically dissolved condition, in the relation of the worker to the conditions of production as capital. The original forms of property necessarily dissolve into the relation to the different objective moments which condition production, as one's own; they form the economic foundation of different forms of community, just as they for their part have specific forms of the community as presupposition. These forms are essentially modified by the inclusion of labour itself among the *objective conditions of production* (serfdom and slavery), through which the simply affirmative character of all forms of property included under No. I is lost and modified. They all contain, within themselves, slavery as possibility and hence as their own suspension. As regards No. II, where the particular kind of work -- mastery of it, and, consequent upon that, an identity between property in the instrument and property in the conditions of production -- while it excludes slavery and bondage, can take on an analogous negative development in the form of the caste system.\> \<The third form, ownership of the necessaries of life -- if it does not reduce itself to slavery and serfdom -- cannot contain a relation by the *working* individual to the conditions of production and hence of existence; it can therefore only be the relation of a member of the original community based on land ownership who has lost his landed property and not yet proceeded to variety No. II of property, such as the Roman *plebs* at the time of the bread and circuses.\> \<The relation of personal servitude, or of the retainers to their lord, is essentially different. For it forms, at bottom, only a mode of existence of the land-proprietor himself, who no longer works, but whose property includes, among the other conditions of production, the workers themselves as bondsmen etc. Here the *master--servant relation* \[*Herrschaftsverhältnis*\] as essential element of appropriation. Basically the appropriation of animals, land etc. cannot take place in a master--servant relation, although the animal provides service. The presupposition of the master--servant relation is the appropriation of an alien []{#p501} *will.* Whatever has no will, e.g. the animal, may well provide a service, but does not thereby make its owner into a *master.* This much can be seen here, however, that the *master--servant relation* likewise belongs in this formula of the appropriation of the instruments of production; and it forms a necessary ferment for the development and the decline and fall of all original relations of property and of production, just as it also expresses their limited nature. Still, it is reproduced -- in mediated form -- in capital, and thus likewise forms a ferment of its dissolution and is an emblem of its limitation.\>

\<'The power to sell one's self and one's own when in distress was a grievous general right; it prevailed in the North as well as among the Greeks and in Asia: the power of the creditor to take into servitude a debtor who could not make payment, and to obtain payment through sale of the debtor's labour or of his person, was almost equally widespread.' (Niebuhr, I, p. 600.)\> \<In one passage Niebuhr says that the Greek writers writing in the period of Augustus had great difficulty with, and misunderstood, the relation between patricians and plebeians, confusing this relation with that between patrons and clients, because they 'write at a time when *rich and poor were the only true classes of citizens;* where the needy person, no matter how noble his ancestry, required a patron, and where the millionaire, even if he were a freed slave, was sought out as a patron. They could hardly find a trace of inherited dependency-relations any longer.' (I, 620.)\> \<'Craftsmen were to be found in both classes -- *Metoikoi*[^6] *and freedmen and their descendants --* and the plebeian who abandoned agriculture assumed the limited civic rights to which these were restricted. They did not lack the privilege of *legal corporations;* and their guilds were so highly esteemed, that Numa[^7] was named as their founder: they were 9: pipers, gold-smiths, carpenters, dyers, harness makers, tanners, copper-smiths, potters, and the ninth guild, the miscellaneous remainder ... Those among them who were independent citizens; isopolites,[^8] who belonged to no patron -- if there was such a right; and descendants of servitors, whose bondage was dissolved by []{#p502}extinction of their patron's line; all these people without a doubt remained as distant from the wranglings of the patricians and the commune as did the Florentine guilds from the feuds of the Guelphs and the Ghibellines: the servitors probably still stood entirely under the command of the patricians.' (I, 623.)\>

On one side, historic processes are presupposed which place a mass of individuals in a nation etc. in the position, if not at first of real free workers, nevertheless of such who are so [δυνάμει]{lang="grc"}, whose only property is their labour capacity and the possibility of exchanging it for values then present; individuals who confront all objective conditions of production as *alien property,* as their own *not-property,* but at the same time as *values,* as exchangeable, hence appropriable to a certain degree through living labour. Such historic processes of dissolution are also the dissolution of the bondage relations which fetter the worker to land and soil and to the lord of land and soil; but which factually presuppose his ownership of the necessaries of life -- this is in truth the process of his release from the earth; dissolution of the landed property relations, which constituted him as a yeoman, as a free, working small landowner or tenant *(colonus),* a free peasant; [\*](#pagenote502){#pagenoter502} dissolution of the guild relations which presuppose his ownership of the instrument of labour, and which presuppose labour itself as a craftsmanlike, specific skill, as property (not merely as the source of property); likewise dissolution of the client-relations in the various forms in which *not-proprietors* appear in the retinue of their lord as co-consumers of the surplus product and wear the livery of their master as an equivalent, participate in his feuds, perform personal services, imaginary or real etc. It will be seen on closer inspection that all these processes of dissolution mean the dissolution of relations of production in which: use value predominates, production for direct consumption; in which exchange value and its production presupposes the predominance of the other form; and hence that, in all these relations, payments in kind and services in kind predominate over payment in money and money-services. But this only by the way. It will likewise be found on closer observation that all the dissolved relations were possible only with a definite degree of development of the material (and hence also the intellectual) forces of production.

[\*](#pagenoter502){#pagenote502} The dissolution of the still earlier forms of communal property and real community goes without saying.

What concerns us here for the moment is this: the process of []{#p503}dissolution, which transforms a mass of individuals of a nation etc. into free wage labourers [δυνάμει]{lang="grc"} -- individuals forced solely by their lack of property to labour and to sell their labour -- presupposes on the other side *not* that these individuals' previous sources of income and in part conditions of property have *disappeared,* but the reverse, that *only* their utilization has become different, that their mode of existence has changed, has gone over into other hands as a *free fund* or has even in part remained *in the same* hands. But this much is clear: the same process which divorced a mass of individuals from their previous relations to the *objective conditions of labour,* relations which were, in one way or another, affirmative, negated these relations, and thereby transformed these individuals into *free workers,* this same process freed -- [δυνάμει]{lang="grc"} -- these *objective conditions of labour --* land and soil, raw material, necessaries of life, instruments of labour, money or all of these -- from their *previous state of attachment* to the individuals now separated from them. They are still *there on hand,* but in another form; as a *free fund,* in which all political etc. relations are obliterated. The objective conditions of labour now confront these unbound, propertyless individuals only in the form of *values,* self-sufficient values. The same process which placed the mass face to face with the *objective conditions of labour* as free workers also placed these conditions, as *capital,* face to face with the free workers. The historic process was the divorce of elements which up until then were bound together; its result is therefore not that one of the elements disappears, but that each of them appears in a negative relation to the other -- the (potentially) free worker on the one side, capital (potentially) on the other. The separation of the objective conditions from the classes which have become transformed into free workers necessarily also appears at the same time as the achievement of independence by these same conditions at the opposite pole.

If the relation of capital and wage labour is regarded not as already commanding and predominant over the whole of production, [\*](#pagenote503){#pagenoter503} but as arising historically -- i.e. if we regard the original transformation of money into capital, the process of exchange between capital, still only existing [δυνάμει]{lang="grc"} on one side and the free workers existing [δυνάμει]{lang="grc"} on the other -- then of course one []{#p504} cannot help making the simple observation, out of which the economists make a great show,[^9] that the side which appears as capital has to possess raw materials, instruments of labour and necessaries of life so that the worker can live during production, before production is completed. This further takes the form that there must have taken place on the part of the capitalist an accumulation -- an accumulation prior to labour and not sprung out of it -- which enables him to put the worker to work and to maintain his effectiveness, to maintain him as living labour capacity. [†](#pagenote504){#pagenoter504} This act by capital which is independent of labour, not posited by labour, is then shifted from the prehistory of capital into the present, into a moment of its reality and of its present activity, of its self-formation. From this is ultimately derived the eternal right of capital to the fruits of alien labour, or rather its mode of appropriation is developed out of the simple and just laws of equivalent exchange.[^10]

[\*](#pagenoter503){#pagenote503} For in that case the capital presupposed as condition of wage labour is wage labour's own product, and is presupposed by it as its own presupposition, created by it as its own presupposition.

[†](#pagenoter504){#pagenote504} Once capital and wage labour are posited as their own presupposition, as the basis presupposed to production itself, then what appears initially is that the capitalist possesses, in addition to the fund of raw materials and necessaries required for the labourer to reproduce himself, to create the required means of subsistence, i.e. to realize *necessary labour,* a fund of raw material and means of labour in which the worker realizes his surplus labour, i.e. the capitalist's profit. On further analysis this takes the form that the worker constantly creates a double fund for the capitalist, or in the form of capital. One part of this fund constantly fulfils the conditions of his own existence and the other part fulfils the conditions for the existence of capital. As we have seen, in the case of the surplus capital -- and surplus capital in relation to its antediluvian relation to labour -- all *real, present capital* and each of its elements has equally been *appropriated* without exchange, without an equivalent, as objectified, appropriated *alien labour.*

Wealth present in the form of money can be exchanged for the objective conditions of labour only because and if these are separated from labour itself. We saw that money can be piled up in part by way of the sheer exchange of equivalents; but this forms so insignificant a source that it is not worth mentioning historically -- if it is presupposed that this money is gained through the exchange of one's own labour. The monetary wealth which becomes transformed into capital in the proper sense, into industrial capital, is rather the mobile wealth piled up through usury -- especially that practised against landed property -- and through mercantile profits. We shall have occasion []{#p505} below to speak further of both of these forms -- in so far as they appear not as themselves forms of capital, but as earlier forms of wealth, as presuppositions for capital.

It is inherent in the concept of capital, as we have seen -- in its origin -- that it begins with *money* and hence with wealth existing in the form of money. It is likewise inherent in it that it appears as coming out of circulation, as the *product* of circulation. The formation of capital thus does not emerge from landed property (here at most from the *tenant* \[*Pächter*\] in so far as he is a dealer in agricultural products); or from the guild (although there is a possibility at the last point); but rather from merchant's and usurer's wealth. But the latter encounter the conditions where free labour can be purchased only when this labour has been released from its objective conditions of existence through the process of history. Only then does it also encounter the possibility of buying these *conditions* themselves. Under guild conditions, e.g., mere money, if it is not itself guild money, masters' money, cannot buy the looms to make people work with them; how many an individual may operate etc. is prescribed. In short, the instrument itself is still so intertwined with living labour, whose domain it appears, that it does not truly circulate. What enables money-wealth to become capital is the encounter, on one side, with free workers; and on the other side, with the necessaries and materials etc., which previously were in one way or another the *property* of the masses who have now become object-less, and are also *free* and purchasable. The other condition of labour, however -- a certain level of skill, instrument as means of labour etc. -- is already *available* to it in this preliminary or first period of capital, partly as a result of the urban guild system, partly as a result of domestic industry, or industry which is attached to agriculture as an accessory. This historic process is not the product of capital, but the presupposition for it. And it is through this process that the capitalist inserts himself as (historic) middle-man between landed property, or property generally, and labour. History knows nothing of the congenial fantasies according to which the capitalist and the workers form an association etc., nor is there a trace of them in the conceptual development of capital. *Manufactures* may develop sporadically, locally, in a framework which still belongs to a quite different period, as e.g. in the Italian cities *alongside* the guilds. But as the sole predominant forms of an epoch, the conditions for capital have to be developed not only []{#p506} locally but on a grand scale. (Notwithstanding this, individual guild masters may develop into capitalists with the dissolution of the guilds; but the case is rare, in the nature of the thing as well. As a rule, the whole guild system declines and falls, both master and journeyman, where the capitalist and the worker arise.)

It goes without saying -- and shows itself if we go more deeply into the historic epoch under discussion here -- that in truth the *period of the dissolution* of the earlier modes of production and modes of the workers relation to the objective conditions of labour *is at the same time a period* in which *monetary wealth* on the one side *has* already developed to a certain extent, and on the other side grows and expands rapidly through the same circumstances as accelerate the above dissolution. It is itself one of the agencies of that dissolution, while at the same time that dissolution is the condition of its transformation into capital. But the *mere presence of monetary wealth,* and even the achievement of a kind of supremacy on its part, is in no way sufficient for this *dissolution into capital* to happen. Or else ancient Rome, Byzantium etc. would have ended their history with free labour and capital, or rather begun a new history. There, too, the dissolution of the old property relations was bound up with development of monetary wealth -- of trade etc. But instead of leading to industry, this dissolution led in fact to the supremacy of the countryside over the city. -- The *original formation* of capital does not happen, as is sometimes imagined, with capital *heaping up* necessaries of life and instruments of labour and raw materials, in short, the *objective* conditions of labour which have already been unbound from the soil and animated by human labour. [\*](#pagenote506){#pagenoter506} Capital does not create the objective conditions of labour. Rather, its *original formation* is that, through the historic process of the dissolution of the old mode of production, value existing as money-wealth []{#p507} is enabled, on one side, *to buy* the objective conditions of labour; on the other side, to exchange money for the *living labour* of the workers who have been set free. All these moments are present; their divorce is itself a historic process, a process of dissolution, and it is *the latter* which enables money to transform itself into *capital.* Money itself, to the extent that it also plays an active role, does so only in so far as it intervenes in this process as itself a highly energetic solvent, and to that extent assists in the creation of the *plucked,* object-less *free workers;* but certainly not by *creating* the objective conditions of their existence; rather by helping to speed up their separation from them -- their propertylessness. When e.g. the great English landowners dismissed their retainers, who had, together with them, consumed the surplus product of the land; when further their tenants chased off the smaller cottagers etc., then, firstly, a mass of living labour powers was thereby thrown onto the *labour market,* a mass which was free in a double sense, free from the old relations of clientship, bondage and servitude, and secondly free of all belongings and possessions, and of every objective, material form of being, *free of all property;* dependent on the sale of its labour capacity or on begging, vagabondage and robbery as its only source of income. It is a matter of historic record that they tried the latter first, but were driven off this road by gallows, stocks and whippings, onto the narrow path to the labour market; owing to this fact, the *governments,* e.g. of Henry VII, VIII etc. appear as conditions of the historic dissolution process and as makers of the conditions for the existence of capital. On the other side, the necessaries of life etc., which the landowners previously ate up together with their retainers, now stood at the disposal of any money which might wish to buy them in order to buy labour through their instrumentality. Money neither *created* nor *stockpiled* these necessaries; they were there and were consumed and reproduced before they were consumed and reproduced through its mediation. What had changed was simply this, that these necessaries were now thrown on to the *exchange market --* were separated from their direct connection with the mouths of the retainers etc. and transformed from use values into exchange values, and thus fell into the domain and under the supremacy of money wealth. Likewise with the instruments of labour. Money wealth neither invented nor fabricated the spinning wheel and the loom. But, once unbound from their land and soil, spinner and weaver with their []{#p508} stools and wheels came under the command of money wealth. *Capital proper does nothing but bring together the mass of hands and instruments which it finds on hand. It agglomerates them under its command.* That is its *real stockpiling;* the stockpiling of workers, along with their instruments, at particular points. This will have to be dealt with more closely in the so-called *stockpiling* of capital. Monetary wealth -- as merchant wealth -- had admittedly helped to speed up and to dissolve the old relations of production, and made it possible for the proprietor of land for example, as A. Smith already nicely develops,[^11] to exchange his grain and cattle etc. for use values brought from afar, instead of squandering the use values he himself produced, along with his retainers, and to locate his wealth in great part in the mass of his co-consuming retainers. It gave the *exchange value* of his revenue a higher significance for him. The same thing took place in regard to his tenants, who were already semi-capitalists, but still very hemmed-in ones. The development of exchange value -- favoured by *money* existing in the form of the merchant estate -- dissolves production which is more oriented towards direct use value and its corresponding forms of property -- the relations of labour to its objective conditions -- and thus pushes forward towards the making of the *labour market* (certainly to be distinguished from the slave market). However, even this action of money is only possible given the presupposition of an *urban artisanate* resting *not* on capital but on the organization of labour in guilds etc. Urban labour itself had created means of production for which the guilds became just as confining as were the old relations of landownership to an improved agriculture, which was in part itself a consequence of the larger market for agricultural products in the cities etc. The other circumstances which e.g. in the sixteenth century increased the mass of circulating commodities as well as that of money, which created new needs and thereby raised the exchange value of indigenous products etc., raised prices etc., all of these promoted on one side the dissolution of the old relations of production, sped up the separation of the worker or non-worker but able-bodied individual from the objective conditions of his reproduction, and thus promoted the transformation of money into capital. There can therefore be nothing more ridiculous than to conceive this *original formation* of capital as if capital had stockpiled and created the *objective conditions of production --* necessaries, raw materials, instrument -- and then []{#p509} offered them to the worker, who was *bare* of these possessions. Rather, monetary wealth in part helped to *strip* the labour powers of able-bodied individuals from these conditions; and in part this process of divorce proceeded without it. When the formation of capital had reached a certain level, monetary wealth could place itself as mediator between the objective conditions of life, thus liberated, and the liberated but also *homeless* and *empty-handed* labour powers, and buy the latter with the former. But now, as far as the *formation of money-wealth* itself is concerned, this belongs to the prehistory of the bourgeois economy. Usury, trade, urbanization and the treasury rising with it play the main roles here. So, too, *hoarding* by tenants, peasants etc.; although to a lesser degree. -- This shows at the same time that the development of exchange and of exchange value, which is everywhere mediated through trade, or whose mediation may be termed trade -- money achieves an independent existence in the merchant estate, as does circulation in trade -- brings with it both the dissolution of *labour's relations of property in its* conditions of existence, in one respect, and at the same time the dissolution of *labour* which is itself *classed as one of the objective conditions of production;* all these are relations which express a predominance of use value and of production directed towards use value, as well as of a real community which is itself still directly present as a presupposition of production. Production based on exchange value and the community based on the exchange of these exchange values -- even though they seem, as we saw in the previous chapter on money, to posit property as the outcome of *labour* alone, and to posit private property over the product of one's own labour as condition -- and labour as general condition of wealth, all presuppose and produce the separation of labour from its objective conditions. This exchange of equivalents proceeds; it is only the surface layer of a production which rests on the appropriation of alien labour *without exchange,* but with the *semblance of exchange.* This system of exchange rests on *capital* as its foundation, and, when it is regarded in isolation from capital, as it appears on the surface, as an *independent* system, then it is a mere *illusion,* but a *necessary illusion.* Thus there is no longer any ground for astonishment that the system of exchange values -- exchange of equivalents measured through labour -- turns into, or rather reveals as its hidden background, the *appropriation of alien labour without exchange,* complete separation of labour and property. For the domination of exchange value []{#p510} itself, and of exchange-value-producing production, *presupposes* alien labour capacity itself as an exchange value -- i.e. the separation of living labour capacity from its objective conditions; a relation to them -- or to its own objectivity -- as alien property; a relation to them, in a word, as *capital.* Only in the period of the decline and fall of the feudal system, but where it still struggles internally -- as in England in the fourteenth and first half of the fifteenth centuries -- is there a golden age for labour in the process of becoming emancipated. In order for labour to relate to its objective conditions as its property again, another system must take the place of the system of private exchange, which, as we saw, posits the exchange of objectified labour for labour capacity, and therefore the appropriation of living labour without exchange. -- The way in which money transforms itself into capital often shows itself quite tangibly in history; e.g. when the merchant induces a number of weavers and spinners, who until then wove and spun as a rural, secondary occupation, to work for him, making their secondary into their chief occupation; but then has them in his power and has brought them under his command as wage labourers. To draw them away from their home towns and to concentrate them in a place of work is a further step. In this simple process it is clear that the capitalist has prepared neither the raw material, nor the instrument, nor the means of subsistence for the weaver and the spinner. All that he has done is to restrict them little by little to one kind of work in which they become dependent on selling, on the *buyer,* the *merchant,* and ultimately produce only *for* and *through* him. He bought their labour originally only by buying their product; as soon as they restrict themselves to the production of this exchange value and thus must directly produce *exchange values,* must exchange their labour entirely for money in order to survive, then they come under his command, and at the end even the illusion that they *sold* him products disappears. He buys their labour and takes their property first in the form of the product, and soon after that the instrument as well, or he leaves it to them as *sham property* in order to reduce his own production costs. -- The original historic forms in which capital appears at first sporadically or *locally, alongside* the old modes of production, while exploding them little by little everywhere, is on one side *manufacture* proper (not yet the factory); this[^12] springs up where []{#p511} mass quantities are produced for export, for the external market -- i.e. on the *basis of large-scale overland and maritime commerce,* in its emporiums like the Italian cities, Constantinople, in the Flemish, Dutch cities, a few Spanish ones, such as Barcelona etc. Manufacture seizes hold initially not of the so-called *urban trades,* but of the *rural secondary occupations,* spinning and weaving, the two which least requires guild-level skills, technical training. Apart from these great emporiums, where the external market is its basis, where production is thus, so to speak, *naturally* oriented towards exchange value -- i.e. manufactures directly connected with shipping, shipbuilding itself etc. -- it takes up its first residence not in the cities, but on the land, in villages lacking guilds etc. The rural subsidiary occupations have the broad basis \[characteristic\] of manufactures, while the urban trades demand great progress in production before they can be conducted in factory style. Likewise certain branches of production -- such as glassworks, metal works, sawmills etc., which demand a higher concentration of labour powers from the outset, apply more natural energy from the outset, demand mass production, likewise concentration of the means of labour etc. Likewise paper mills. On the other side the rise of the tenant and the transformation of the agricultural population into free day-labourers. Although this transformation in the countryside is the last to push on towards its ultimate consequences and its purest form, its beginnings there are among the earliest. Classical antiquity, which could never get beyond the urban artisanate proper, could therefore never get to large industry. The first presupposition of the latter is to draw the land in all its expanse into the production not of use values but of exchange values. Glass factories, paper mills, iron works etc. cannot be operated on guild principles. They demand mass production; sales to a general market; *monetary wealth* on the part of their entrepreneur -- not that he creates the conditions, neither the subjective nor the objective ones; but under the old relations of property and of production these conditions cannot be brought together. -- The dissolution of relations of serfdom, like the rise of manufacture, then little by little transforms all branches of work into branches operated by capital. -- The cities themselves, it is true, also contain an element for the formation of wage labour proper, in the non-guild day-labourers, unskilled labourers etc.

[\*](#pagenoter506){#pagenote506} The first glance shows what a nonsensical circle it would be if on the one hand the *workers* whom capital has to put to work in order to posit itself as capital had first to be *created,* to be brought to life through its *stockpiling* if they waited for its command, *Let There Be Workers!;* while at the same time it were itself incapable of *stockpiling* without alien labour, could at most stockpile *its own labour,* i.e. could itself exist in the form of *not-capital* and *not-money;* since labour, before the existence of capital, can only realize itself in forms such as craft labour, petty agriculture etc., in short, all forms which can *not stockpile,* or only sparingly; in forms which allow of only a small surplus product and *eat up* most of it. We shall have to examine this notion of *stockpiling* \[*Aufhäufung*\] still more closely later on.

While, as we have seen, the transformation of money into capital presupposes a historic process which divorces the objective []{#p512} conditions of labour from the worker and makes them independent of him, it is at the same time the effect of capital and of its process, once arisen, to conquer all of production and to develop and complete the divorce between labour and property, between labour and the objective conditions of labour, everywhere. It will be seen in the course of the further development how capital destroys craft and artisan labour, working small-landownership etc., together with itself in forms in which it does *not* appear in opposition to labour -- in *small capital* and in the intermediate species, the species between the old modes of production (or their renewal on the foundation of capital) and the classical, adequate mode of production of capital itself.

The only stockpiling presupposed at the origin of capital is that of *monetary wealth,* which, regarded in and for itself, is altogether unproductive, as it only springs up out of circulation and belongs exclusively to it. Capital rapidly forms an internal market for itself by destroying all rural secondary occupations, so that it spins, weaves for everyone, clothes everyone etc., in short, brings the commodities previously created as direct use values into the form of exchange values, a process which comes about by itself through the separation of the workers from land and soil and from property (even in the form of serf property) in the conditions of production.

With the urban crafts, although they rest essentially on exchange and on the creation of exchange values, the direct and chief aim of this production is *subsistence as craftsmen,* as *master-journeymen,* hence use value; not *wealth,* not *exchange value as exchange value.* Production is therefore always subordinated to a given consumption, supply to demand, and expands only slowly.

The *production of capitalists and wage labourers is thus a chief product of capital's realization process.* Ordinary economics, which looks only at the things produced, forgets this completely. When objectified labour is, in this process, at the same time posited as the worker's *non-objectivity,* as the objectivity of a subjectivity antithetical to the worker, as *property* of a will alien to him, then capital is necessarily at the same time the *capitalist,* and the idea held by some socialists that we need capital but not the capitalists is altogether wrong. It is posited within the concept of capital that the objective conditions of labour -- and these are its own product -- take on a *personality* towards it, or, what is the same, that they are posited as the property of a personality alien to the worker. The concept of capital contains the capitalist. Still, this error is in no []{#p513} way greater than that of e.g. all philologists who speak of *capital* in antiquity, of Roman, Greek capitalists. This is only another way of expressing that labour in Rome and Greece was *free,* which these gentlemen would hardly wish to assert. The fact that we now not only call the plantation owners in America capitalists, but that they *are* capitalists, is based on their existence as anomalies within a world market based on free labour. If the concern is the word, capital, which does not occur in antiquity [\*](#pagenote513){#pagenoter513} then the still migrating hordes with their herds on the Asiatic high plateau are the biggest capitalists, since capital originally means cattle, which is why the *métairie* contract still frequently drawn up in southern France, for lack of capital, just as an exception, is called: *Bail de bestes à cheptel.*[^14] If one wants to descend to bad Latin, then our capitalists or *Capitales Homines* would be those '*qui debent censum de capite*'.[^15]

[\*](#pagenoter513){#pagenote513} Although [ἀρχεῖα]{lang="grc"} among the Greeks, corresponding to the *principalis summa rei creditae*.[^13]

The conceptual specification of capital encounters difficulties which do not occur with money; capital is essentially *capitalist;* but at the same time again as an element of his existence distinct from him, or production in general, *capital.* We shall likewise find later that many things are subsumed under *capital* which do not seem to belong within it conceptually. E.g. capital is lent out. It is stockpiled etc. In all these designations it appears to be a mere thing, and to coincide entirely with the matter in which it is present. But this and other questions will be cleared up in the course of the development. (Noted incidentally as a joke: the good Adam Müller, who takes all figurative ways of speaking as very mystical, has also heard of *living capital* in ordinary life as opposed to *dead* capital, and now rationalizes this theosophically.[^16] King Aethelstan could []{#p514} teach him a lesson here: *Reddam de meo proprio decimas Deo tam in Vivente Capitale* (livestock), *quam in mortis fructuis terrae* (dead fruits of the earth).)[^17] Money always remains the same form in the same substratum; and can thus be more easily conceived as a mere thing. But one and the same commodity, money etc., can represent capital or revenue etc. Thus it is clear even to the economists that money is not something tangible; but that one and the same thing can be subsumed sometimes under the title capital, sometimes under another and contrary one, and correspondingly *is* or *is not* capital. It is then evident that it is a *relation, and can only be a relation of production.*

We have seen that the true nature of capital emerges only at the *end of the second cycle.* What we have to examine now is this cycle itself, or the *circulation of capital.* Production originally appeared to lie beyond circulation, and circulation beyond production. The circulation of capital -- circulation posited as the circulation of capital -- spans both moments. Production appears in it as the conclusion and the point of departure of circulation, and vice versa. The independence of circulation is here reduced to a mere semblance, as is the otherworldliness of production.

##### *Exchange of labour for labour rests on the worker's propertylessness*

\<But one more remark on the topic above: The exchange of equivalents, which seems to presuppose ownership of the products of one's own labour -- hence seems to posit as identical: *appropriation through labour,* the real economic process of making something one's own \[*Zueigen-Machen*\], and *ownership of objectified* labour; what appeared previously as a real process is here recognized as a legal relation, i.e. as a general condition of production, and therefore recognized by law, posited as an expression of the general will -- turns into, reveals itself through a necessary dialectic as absolute divorce of labour and property, and appropriation of alien labour without exchange, without equivalent. Production based on exchange value, on whose surface this free and equal exchange of equivalents proceeds, is at its base the exchange of *objectified labour* as exchange value for living labour as use []{#p515} value, or, to express this in another way, the relating of labour to its objective conditions -- and hence to the objectivity created by itself -- as alien property: *alienation* \[*Entäusserung*\] *of labour.* At the same time, the condition of exchange value is its measurement by labour time, and hence living labour -- not its value -- as measure of values. The notion that production and hence society depended in all states of production on the *exchange of mere* *labour for labour* is a delusion. In the various forms in which labour relates to the conditions of production as its own property, the reproduction of the worker is by no means posited through *mere labour,* for his property relation is not the result but the presupposition of his labour. In landed property this is clear; it must also become clear in the guild system that the particular kind of property which labour creates does not rest on labour alone or on the exchange of labour, but on an objective connection between the worker and a community and conditions which are there before him, which he takes as his basis. These too are products of labour, of the labour of world history; of the labour of the community -- of its historic development, which does not proceed from the labour of individuals nor from the exchange of their labours. Therefore, mere labour is also not the presupposition of realization \[*Verwertung*\]. A situation in which labour is merely exchanged for labour -- whether in the direct, living form, or in the form of the product -- presupposes the separation of labour from its original intertwinement with its objective conditions, which is why it appears as mere labour on one side, while on the other side its product, as objectified labour, has an entirely independent existence as value opposite it. *The exchange of labour for labour --* *seemingly the condition of the worker's property -- rests on the* *foundation of the worker's propertylessness.*\>

(It will be shown later that the *most extreme form of alienation,* wherein labour appears in the relation of capital and wage labour, and labour, productive activity appears in relation to its own conditions and its own product, is a necessary point of transition -- and therefore already contains in *itself,* in a still only inverted form, turned on its head, the dissolution of all *limited presuppositions of production,* and moreover creates and produces the unconditional presuppositions of production, and therewith the full material conditions for the total, universal development of the productive forces of the individual.) []{#p516}

##### *Circulation of capital and circulation of money. -- Presupposition of value within each single capital (instrument etc.). -- Production process and circulation process moments of production. -- The productivity of the different capitals (branches of industry) determines that of the individual capital. -- Circulation period. Velocity of circulation substitutes for volume of capital. Mutual dependence of capitals in the velocity of their circulation. Circulation a moment of production. Production process and its duration. Transformation of the product into money. Duration of this operation. Retransformation of money into the conditions of production. Exchange of part of the capital with living labour. -- Transport costs*

The circulation of money began at an infinite number of points and returned to an infinite number of points. The point of return was in no way posited as the point of departure. In the circulation of capital, the point of departure is posited as the terminal point and the terminal point as the point of departure. The capitalist himself is the point of departure and of return. He exchanges money for the conditions of production, produces, realizes the product, i.e. transforms it into money, and then begins the process anew. The circulation of money, regarded for itself, necessarily becomes extinguished in money as a static thing. The circulation of capital constantly ignites itself anew, divides into its different moments, and is a *perpetuum mobile.* The positing of prices on the side of money circulation was purely formal, in so far as *value* is presupposed independently of money circulation. The circulation of capital *posits prices,* not only formally but really, in so far as it posits value. If value itself appears within it as presupposition, this can only be as *value posited* by another capital. The breadth of the path for money circulation has been measured in advance, and the circumstances which accelerate or retard it are external impulses. In its circulation, capital expands itself and its path, and the speed or slowness of its circulation itself forms one of its intrinsic moments. It becomes qualitatively altered in circulation and the totality of the moments of its circulation are themselves the moments of its production -- its reproduction as well as its new production.[]{#iiie3}

\<We saw how at the end of the second cycle, i.e. the second cycle of surplus value which has been realized as surplus capital, the illusion disappears that the capitalist exchanges anything at all []{#p517} with the worker other than a part of the latter's own objectified labour.[^18] However, within the mode of production already founded on capital, the part of capital which represents raw materials and instrument appears to the individual capital as a value *presupposed* to it and likewise presupposed to the *living labour* which it buys. These two headings turn out to have been posited by *alien capital,* hence again by *capital,* but another one. One capitalist's raw material is another's product. One's product is the other's raw material. One capitalist's *instrument* is another's product, and may even serve as raw material for the production of another instrument. Thus, what we called the constant value which appeared as a presupposition in the case of the individual capital is nothing but the presupposition of capital by capital, i.e. the fact that the different capitals in the different branches of industry posit one another reciprocally as presupposition and condition. Each of them regarded for itself can be resolved into dead labour which, as *value,* has *become independent vis-à-vis* living labour. None of them in the last analysis contains anything other than labour -- apart from the natural material from which value is absent. The introduction of *many* capitals must not interfere with the investigation here. The relation of the *many* will, rather, be explained after what they all have in common, the quality of being capital, has been examined.\>

The circulation of capital is at the same time its becoming, its growth, its vital process. If anything needed to be compared with the circulation of the blood, it was not the formal circulation of money, but the content-filled circulation of capital.

Since circulation presupposes production at all points -- and is the circulation of products, whether money or commodity, while the latter always arise from the production process, which is itself the process of capital -- it follows that the circulation of money itself now appears as determined by the circulation of capital, whereas previously it seemed to run *side by side with* the production process. We shall return to this point.

If we now consider circulation, or the circulation of capital as a whole, then the great distinction within it appears to be that between the production process and circulation itself, both as moments of its circulation. How long capital remains within the sphere of the production process depends on the latter's technological conditions, and the time it spends in this phase directly []{#p518} coincides -- even though the duration is necessarily different depending on the type of production, its object etc. -- with the development of the productive forces. The duration is here nothing but the labour time necessary for the making of the product (false!).[^19] The smaller this labour time, the greater, as we have seen, the relative surplus value. If less labour time is required to make a given quantity of products, it is the same thing as if more finished products can be supplied in a given amount of labour time. The abbreviation of the time during which a given amount of capital remains within the production process and is withdrawn from circulation, 'embarked',[^20] coincides with the abbreviation of the labour time required to make the product -- \[therefore coincides\] with the development of the forces of production, the utilization of the forces of nature, of machinery, and of the natural powers of social labour -- the agglomeration of the workers, the combination and division of labour. Thus no new moment seems to enter in from this side. However, when it is recalled that, as far as the individual capital is concerned, the part of it which constitutes raw material and instrument (means of labour) is itself the product of an alien capital, then it may be seen that the speed with which it can repeat the production process anew is at the same time determined by the development of the productive forces in all other branches of industry. This becomes quite clear if one supposes the same capital to produce its own raw materials, instruments and final products. The length of time during which capital remains in the phase of the production process becomes itself a moment of circulation, if we presuppose *various* capitals. But we are not yet concerned with *many* capitals here. This moment therefore does not belong here.

The second moment is the space of time running from the completed transformation of capital into the product until when it becomes transformed into money. The frequency with which capital can repeat the production process, self-realization, in a given amount of time, evidently depends on the speed with which this space of time is run through, or on its duration. If a capital -- say originally a capital of 100 thalers -- turns over 4 times in one year; let the gain be 5% of itself each time, if the new value is not capitalized; this is the same as if a capital 4 times as large, say 400, at the same percentage, were to turn over *once* in one year; each []{#p519} time 20%. The velocity of turnover therefore -- the remaining conditions of production being held constant -- substitutes for the *volume* of capital. Or, if a value 4 times smaller realizes itself as capital 4 times in the same period in which a 4 times greater value realizes itself as capital only once, then the smaller capital's gain -- production of surplus value -- is *at least as great* as the larger's. We say at least. It can be greater, because the surplus value can itself again be employed as surplus capital. For example, assume that a capital of 100 has a profit (here anticipating *this form* of surplus value for the calculation's sake) of 10% each time, no matter how often it turns over. Then, at the end of the first 3 months, it would be 110, at the end of the second 121, at the end of the third 133 1/10, and at the end of the last turnover 146 41/100, while a capital of 400 with one annual turnover would be only 440. In the first case the gain = 46 41/100, in the second only = 40. (The fact that the presupposition is wrong, in as much as capital does not bring the *same* rate of profit with each increase in its size, is beside the point as far as the example is concerned, for the issue here is not how much more than 40 it brings, but the very fact that in the first case it does -- and it does -- bring in more than 40.) We have already encountered the law of the substitution of velocity for mass, and mass for velocity, in money circulation. It holds in production just as in mechanics. It is a circumstance to return to when we consider the equalization of the rate of profit, price etc. The question which interests us here is this: Does not a moment of value-determination enter in independently of labour, not arising directly from it, but originating in circulation itself? \<The fact that *credit* equalizes the differences in capital turnover does not belong here yet. But the question itself belongs here, because it arises out of the simple concept of capital -- regarded in general.\> The more frequent turnover of capital in a given period of time resembles the more frequent harvests during the natural year in the southerly countries compared with the northerly. As already stated above, we here abstract entirely from the different amounts of time which capital must spend in the phase of production -- in the productive realization process itself. Just as grain when it is put in the soil as seed loses its immediate use value, is *devalued* as immediate use value, so is capital *devalued* from the completion of the production process until its retransformation into money and from there into capital again. \<This velocity with which it can transpose itself from the form of money back into the conditions of production -- unlike []{#p520} in slavery, it is not the worker himself who appears among these conditions of production, but rather the exchange with him -- depends on the production speed and continuity of the remaining capitals, which supply him with raw material and instrument, as well as on the availability of workers, and in this last respect a relative surplus population is the best condition for capital.\> \<Quite apart from capital A's production process, the speed and continuity of production process B appears as a moment which conditions the retransformation of capital A from the form of money into the form of industrial capital. The duration of the *production process* of capital B thus appears as a moment in the *velocity of the circulation process* of capital A. The duration of one capital's production phase determines the velocity of the other's circulation phase. Their *simultaneity* is a condition required so that A's circulation is not obstructed -- the fact that its own elements, for which it has to exchange and be exchanged, are thrown into production and circulation simultaneously. For example. In the final third of the eighteenth century, the hand-spinning system was incapable of supplying the required amounts of raw material for weaving -- or, what is the same -- spinning could not put the flax or cotton through its production process with the required simultaneity -- simultaneous velocity. The consequence was the invention of the spinning machine, which supplied a greater product in the same labour time, or, what is the same thing, required less labour time for the same product -- less time delay in the spinning process. All moments of capital which appear involved in it when it is considered from the point of view of its general concept obtain an independent reality, and, further, only show themselves when it appears as real, as many capitals. The inner, living organization, which takes place in this way within and through competition, thus develops all the more extensively.\>

If we examine the entire turnover of capital, then four moments appear, or, each of the two great moments of the production process and the circulation process appears again in a duality: we can take either circulation or production as the point of departure here. This much has now been said, that circulation is itself a moment of production, since capital becomes capital only through circulation; production is a moment of circulation only in so far as the latter is itself regarded as the totality of the production process. The moments are: (I) The real production process and its duration. (II) Transformation of the product into money. Duration of this []{#p521} operation. (III) Transformation of the money in the proper proportions into raw material, means of labour and labour, in short, into the elements of productive capital. (IV) The exchange of a part of the capital for living labour capacity can be regarded as a particular moment, and must be so regarded, since the labour market is ruled by other laws than the product market etc. Here population is the main thing, not in absolute but in relative terms. Moment I does not come into consideration here, as stated, since it coincides with the conditions of realization generally. Moment III can be considered only when the theme is not capital generally, but many capitals. Moment IV belongs in the section on wages etc.

We are concerned here only with Moment II. In money circulation there was a merely formal alternation of exchange value as money and as commodity. Here *money, commodity, are conditions of production,* ultimately of the production process. The moments here are different; they are filled with content. The differences in capital turnover as posited in II -- since it depends neither on greater difficulty in the exchange with labour, nor on delays resulting from the fact that raw material \[*Rohstoff*\] and raw material \[*Rohmaterial*\][^21] are not present simultaneously in circulation, nor in the different durations of the production process -- could therefore arise only from increased difficulties in realization. This is obviously not an immanent case arising from the relation itself, but rather coincides here, where we are examining capital in general, with what we have said about the way in which realization simultaneously results in devaluation.[^22] No business will be founded on the principle that it can sell its products with *greater difficulty* than another. If this resulted from the smaller size of the market, then not a larger -- as presupposed -- but a smaller capital would be employed there than in the business with a larger market. It could be connected, however, with the *greater distance of the market in space* and hence the delayed return. The longer time required by capital A to realize itself would be due here to the greater spatial distance it has to travel after the production []{#p522} process in order to exchange as C for M. But cannot e.g. the product produced for China be regarded in such a way that the product is completed, its production process completed, only when it has reached the Chinese market? Its realization costs would rise by the costs of transport from England to China. (We cannot yet speak about the compensation for the longer fallow period of capital here, because the secondary and derived forms of surplus value -- interest -- would already have to have been presupposed.) The costs of production would resolve into the labour time objectified in the direct production process + the labour time contained in transport. Now the question is initially this: Given the basic principles we have so far asserted, can a surplus value be extracted from the transport costs? Let us deduct the constant part of the capital consumed in transport, ship, vehicle etc. and everything which falls under the heading of their application, since this element contributes nothing to the question, and it is irrelevant whether this is posited as = 0 or = *x.* Is it possible, then, that there is surplus labour in these transport costs, and that capital can therefore squeeze a surplus value out of them? The question is simple to answer if we ask a further question, where and which is the necessary labour or the value in which it objectifies itself? The product must pay (1) its own exchange value, the labour objectified in itself; (2) the surplus time, which the shipper, carter etc. employs on its transportation. Whether he can or cannot extract the surplus value depends on the wealth of the country into which he brings the product and on its needs etc., on the use value of the product for this land. In direct production, it is clear that all the surplus labour which the manufacturer makes the worker do is surplus value for him, in that it is labour objectified in new use values, which costs him nothing. But he can obviously not employ him during transport for a longer time than is required for the transporting. Otherwise he would throw labour time away instead of realizing it, i.e. he would not objectify it in a use value. If the sailor, the carter etc. require only half a year of labour time to live a full year (if this is generally the proportion of labour necessary for subsistence), then the capitalist employs him for a whole year and pays him a half. By adding a whole year's labour time to the value of the transported products, but paying only 1/2, he gains a surplus value of 100% on necessary labour. The case is entirely the same as indirect production, and the original surplus value of the transported product can come about only because the workers are []{#p523} *not paid* for a part of the transportation time, because it is surplus time, time *over and above* the labour necessary for them to live. That an individual product might be made so much more expensive, owing to the transport costs, that it could not be sold -- on account of the disproportion between the value of the product and its surplus value as a transported product, a quality which becomes extinguished in it as soon as it has arrived at its destination -- does not affect the matter. If a manufacturer were to set his entire machinery into motion in order to spin 1 lb. of twist, then the value of this lb. would likewise rise so that it would hardly find a market. The rise in the prices of imported products, as well as the smaller consumption of them in the Middle Ages etc., stem precisely from this cause. Whether I extract metals from mines, or take commodities to the site of their consumption, both movements are equally spatial. The improvement of the means of transport and communication likewise falls into the category of the development of the productive forces generally. The fact that it can depend on the value of the products whether or not they are able to bear transport costs; that, further, commercial traffic in mass quantities is required to reduce transport costs -- a ship with a loading capacity of 100 tons can carry 2 or 100 tons with the same transport costs etc. -- and in order to make means of communication pay etc., all this does not belong here. (Nevertheless, it will be necessary to devote a special section to the means of communication, since they make up a form of fixed capital which has its own laws of realization.) If one imagines the same capital both producing and transporting, then both acts fall within direct production, and circulation as we have considered it so far, i.e. transformation into money as soon as the product has achieved its final form for consumption, would begin only when the product had been brought to its point of destination. This capitalist's delayed return compared to that of another, who gets rid of his product on the spot, would resolve into another form of greater use of fixed capital, with which we are not yet concerned here. Whether A requires 100 thalers more for instrument, or whether he needs 100 thalers more in order to bring his product to its destination, to market, is the same thing. In both cases more fixed capital is used; more *means* of production, which is consumed in direct production. In this respect, then, no immanent case would be posited here; it would fall under the examination of the difference between fixed capital and circulating capital. []{#p524}

##### *Circulation costs. -- Means of communication and transport. (Division of the branches of labour.) (*Concentration *of many workers. Productive force of this concentration.) (*Mass *production.)* -- General as distinct from particular conditions of production

Still, an additional moment enters here: the *costs of circulation,* which are not contained in the simple concept of circulation and do not concern us yet. Only in connection with interest and particularly with credit can we speak of the *costs of circulation* arising from circulation as an economic act -- as a relation of production, not as a direct moment of production, as was the case with the *means of transport and communication.* Circulation as we regard it here is a process of transformation, a qualitative process of value, as it appears in the different form of money, production (realization) process, product, retransformation into money and surplus capital. \[We are concerned here\] in so far as new aspects are created within this process of transformation as such -- in this transition from one form to another. The costs of circulation are not necessarily included e.g. in the transition from product to money. They can be = 0.

However, in so far as circulation itself creates costs, itself requires surplus labour, it appears as itself included within the production process. In this respect circulation appears as a moment of the direct production process. Where production is directly oriented towards use, and only the excess product is exchanged, the costs of circulation appear only for the excess product, not for the main product.[^23] The more production comes to rest on exchange value, hence on exchange, the more important do the physical conditions of exchange -- the means of communication and transport -- become for the costs of circulation. Capital by its nature drives beyond every spatial barrier. Thus the creation of the physical conditions of exchange -- of the means of communication and transport -- the annihilation of space by time -- becomes an extraordinary necessity for it. Only in so far as the direct product can be realized in distant markets in mass quantities in proportion to reductions in the transport costs, and only in so far as at the same time the means of communication and transport themselves can yield spheres of realization for labour, driven by capital; only in so far as commercial traffic takes place in massive volume -- in which more than necessary labour is replaced -- only to that extent is the []{#p525} production of cheap means of communication and transport a condition for production based on capital, and promoted by it *for that reason.* All labour required in order to throw the finished product into circulation -- it is in economic circulation only when it is present on the market -- is from capital's viewpoint a barrier to be overcome -- as is all labour required as a *condition* for the production process (thus e.g. expenses for the security of exchange etc.). The sea route, as the route which moves and is transformed under its own impetus, is that of trading peoples [ϰατ᾽ ἐξοχήν]{lang="grc"}.[^24] On the other side, highways originally fall to the community, later for a long period to the governments, as pure deductions from production, deducted from the common surplus product of the country, but do not constitute a source of its wealth, i.e. do not cover their production costs. In the original, self-sustaining communes of Asia, on one side no need for roads; on the other side the lack of them locks them into their closed-off isolation and thus forms an essential moment of their survival without alteration (as in India). Road construction by means of the *corvée,* or through taxes, which is another form, is a forced transformation of a part of a country's surplus labour or surplus product into roads. If an individual capital is to undertake this -- i.e. if it is to create the conditions of the production process which are not included in the *production* process directly -- then the work must provide a profit.

Presupposing a certain road between A and B (let land cost nothing), then this contains no more than a definite quantity of labour, hence value. Whether the capitalist or the state has it built is the same thing. Does the capitalist make a gain here, then, by creating surplus labour and hence surplus value? First, strip off what is puzzling about the road, which arises from its nature as fixed capital. Imagine that the road could be sold at once, like a coat or a ton of iron. If the production of the road cost say 12 months, then its value = 12 months. If the general standard of labour is such that a worker can live from say 6 months of objectified labour, then, if he built the entire road, he would create surplus value for himself to the amount of 6 months labour; or if the commune built the road, and the worker wanted to work only the necessary time, then another worker would have to be drawn in to work 6 months. The capitalist, however, forces the one worker to work 12 months, and pays him 6. The part of the value of the road []{#p526}which contains his surplus labour forms the capitalist's profit. The material form in which the product appears must absolutely not interfere in laying the foundations of the theory of value through objectified labour time. But the question is precisely: can the capitalist realize the road \[*den Weg verwerten*\], can he realize \[*realisieren*\] its value through exchange? This question naturally arises with every product, but it takes a special form with the general conditions of production. Suppose the value of the road is not realized. But it is built anyway, because it is a necessary use value. How does the matter stand then? It has to be built and has to be paid for -- in so far as its cost of production must be exchanged for it. It comes into existence only through a certain consumption of labour, means of labour, raw materials etc. Whether it is built by *corvée* or through taxes is the same. But it is built only because it is a necessary use value for the commune, because the commune requires it at any price. This is certainly a surplus labour which the individual must perform, whether in the form of forced labour, or in the indirect form of taxes, over and above the direct labour necessary for his subsistence. But to the extent that it is necessary for the commune, and for each individual as its *member,* what he performs is not surplus labour, but a part of his *necessary* labour, the labour necessary for him to reproduce himself as *commune member* and hence to reproduce the community, which is itself a general condition of his productive activity. If the labour time were entirely consumed in direct production (or, expressed indirectly, if it were impossible to raise surplus tax revenue for this specific purpose), then the road would have to remain unbuilt. If the whole society is regarded as one individual, then necessary labour would consist of the sum of all the particular labour functions which the division of labour separates off. This one individual would have to spend e.g. so much time for agriculture, so much for industry, so much for trade, so much for making instruments, so much, to return to our subject, for road building and means of communication. All these necessities resolve into so much labour time which must be directed towards different aims and expended in particular activities. How much labour time could be employed would depend on the amount of labour capacity (= the mass of individuals capable of labour who constitute the society) and on the development of the productive force of labour (the mass of products (use values) which it can create in a given span of time). Exchange value, which presupposes a more or less developed division of labour, depending on []{#p527} the level of exchange itself, presupposes that, instead of one individual (the society) doing different kinds of labour and employing his labour time in different forms, each and every individual's labour time is devoted exclusively to the necessary particular functions. If we speak of *necessary labour time,* then the particular separate branches of labour appear *as necessary.* Where exchange value is the basis, this reciprocal necessity is mediated through exchange, and shows itself precisely in the fact that every particular \[piece of\] objectified labour, every particularly specified and materialized \[piece of\] labour time exchanges for the product and symbol of labour time in general, of objectified labour time pure and simple, for money, and can thus be exchanged again for every particular labour. This necessity is itself subject to changes, because needs are produced just as are products and the different kinds of work skills. Increases and decreases do take place within the limits set by these needs and necessary labours. The greater the extent to which historic needs -- needs created by production itself, social needs -- needs which are themselves the offspring of social production and intercourse, are posited as *necessary,* the higher the level to which real wealth has become developed. Regarded *materially,* wealth consists only in the manifold variety of needs. The crafts themselves do not appear *necessary* ALONGSIDE self-sustaining agriculture, where spinning, weaving etc. are done as a secondary domestic occupation. But e.g. if agriculture itself rests on scientific activities -- if it requires machinery, chemical fertilizer acquired through exchange, seeds from distant countries etc., and if rural, patriarchal manufacture has already vanished -- which is already implied in the presupposition -- then the machine-making factory, external trade, crafts etc. appear as *needs* for agriculture. Perhaps guano can be procured for it only through the export of silk goods. Then the manufacture of silk no longer appears as a luxury industry, but as a necessary industry for agriculture. It is therefore chiefly and essentially because, in this case, agriculture no longer finds the natural conditions of its own production within itself, naturally, arisen, spontaneous, and ready to hand, but these exist as an independent industry separate from it -- and, with this separateness the whole complex set of interconnections in which this industry exists is drawn into the sphere of the conditions of agricultural production -- it is because of this, that what previously appeared as a luxury is now necessary, and that so-called luxury needs appear e.g. as a necessity for the most naturally necessary and down-to-[]{#p528}earth industry of all. This pulling-away of the natural ground from the foundations of every industry, and this transfer of its conditions of production outside itself, into a general context -- hence the transformation of what was previously superfluous into what is necessary, as a historically created necessity -- is the tendency of capital. The general foundation of all industries comes to be general exchange itself, the world market, and hence the totality of the activities, intercourse, needs etc. of which it is made up. *Luxury* is the opposite of the *naturally necessary.* Necessary needs are those of the individual himself reduced to a natural subject. The development of industry suspends this natural necessity as well as this former luxury -- in bourgeois society, it is true, it does so only in *antithetical form,* in that it itself only posits another specific social standard as necessary, opposite luxury. These questions about the *system of needs* and *system of labours --* at what point is this to be dealt with? Will be seen in due course.

Now back to our road. If it can be built at all, it proves that the society possesses the labour time (living labour and objectified labour) required for its construction. [\*](#pagenote528){#pagenoter528} Why, then, as soon as production based on exchange value and division of labour appears does road building not become the business of individuals? (And it does not so become where it is conducted through taxes by the state.) First of all: the society, the united individuals, may possess the surplus time to build the road, but only in concentration. Concentration is always the addition of the part of labour capacity which each individual can employ on road building, apart from his particular work; but it is *not only* addition. The unification of their forces increases their *force of production;* but this is by no means the same as saying that all of them added together numerically would possess the same labour capacity if they did not *work together,* hence if to the sum of their labour capacities were not added the *surplus* existing only in and through their *united, combined* labour. Hence the violent rounding-up of the people in Egypt, Etruria, India etc. for forced construction and compulsory public works. Capital effects the same concentration in *another*[]{#p529} way, through the manner of its exchange with free labour. [†](#pagenote529){#pagenoter529} *Secondly*: On one side, the population may be developed far enough, and the support which it finds in the employment of machinery etc. may be far enough advanced on the other side, so that the power arising only from the material, *massive concentration* of labour -- and in antiquity it is always this *massive* effect of forcibly concentrated labour -- may be superfluous, and a *relatively* smaller *mass of living labour* may be required. [‡](#pagenote529_2){#pagenoter529_2} A special class of road-workers may form, employed by the state, [§](#pagenote529_3){#pagenoter529_3} or a part of the occasionally unemployed population is used for it, together with a number of superintendents etc., who do not work as capitalists, however, but as more highly educated *menials.* (About the relation of this skilled labour etc. later.) The workers are then wage workers, but the state employs them not as such, but as menial servants.

[\*](#pagenoter528){#pagenote528} It is here presupposed of course that it follows a correct instinct. It could eat up the seed grain, let the field lie fallow, and build roads. But it would thereby not have accomplished the *necessary labour,* because it would not *reproduce* itself, not maintain itself as living labour capacity through this labour. Alternatively the living labour capacities may be directly murdered, as e.g. by Peter I, to build Petersburg. This sort of thing does not belong here.

[†](#pagenoter529){#pagenote529} That capital has to do not with isolated, individual labour but with combined labour, just as it is in and for itself already a social, combined force, is a point which should perhaps be treated already in the general history of the rise of capital.

[‡](#pagenoter529_2){#pagenote529_2} The greater the extent to which production still rests on mere manual labour, on use of muscle power etc., in short on physical exertion by individual labourers, the more does the increase of the *productive force* consist in their collaboration *on a mass scale.* The opposite features, particularization and individualization, are displayed by the semi-artistic crafts; the skilfulness of individual, but uncombined labour. Capital, in its true development, combines mass labour with skill, but in such a way that the former loses its physical power, and the skill resides not in the worker but in the machine and in the scientific combination of both as a whole in the factory. The social spirit of labour obtains an objective existence separate from the individual workers.

[§](#pagenoter529_3){#pagenote529_3} *Among the Romans, the army constituted a mass --* but already divorced from the whole people -- which was disciplined to labour, whose surplus time also belonged to the state; who sold their entire labour time for pay to the state, exchanged their entire labour capacity for a wage necessary for the maintenance of their life, just as does the worker with the capitalist. This holds for the period when the Roman army was no longer a citizen's army but a mercenary army. This is here likewise a free sale of labour on the part of the soldier. But the state does not buy it with the production of values as aim. And thus, although the wage form may seem to occur originally in armies, this pay system is nevertheless essentially different from wage labour. There is some similarity in the fact that the state uses up the army in order to gain an increase in power and wealth.

Now, for the capitalist to undertake road building as a business, at his expense, [\*](#pagenote529_4){#pagenoter529_4} various conditions are required, which all amount to this, that the mode of production based on capital is already developed to its highest stage. *Firstly: Large capital* is itself []{#p530} presupposed, a large capital concentrated in his hands, in order that he may be able to undertake work of such dimensions and of such slow turnover, \[and hence\] realization. Hence mostly *share-capital,* the form in which capital has worked itself up to its final form, in which it is posited, not only *in itself,* in its substance, but is posited also in its *form,* as social power and product. *Secondly*: It must bring *interest,* but not necessarily *profit* (it may bring more than interest, but this is not required). We do not yet need to examine this point any further here. *Thirdly*: As presupposition, such a volume of traffic -- commercial, above all -- that the road pays for itself, i.e. that the price demanded for the use of the road *is worth* that much exchange value for the producers, or supplies a productive force for which they can pay that much. *Fourthly*: A portion of idle wealth which can lay out its revenue for these articles of locomotion. But these two presuppositions are what remains essential: (1) Capital in the required mass, employable for this object, at attractive interest; (2) it has to be worth it for the productive capitals, for industrial capital, to pay the price of passage. Thus e.g. the first railway between Liverpool and Manchester had become a necessity of production for the Liverpool cotton brokers and even more for the Manchester manufacturers. [†](#pagenote530){#pagenoter530} Capital as such -- its being posited with the necessary scope -- will produce roads only when the production of roads has become a necessity for the producers, especially for productive capital itself; a condition for the capitalist's *profit-making*. Then the road will pay for itself. But in this case, a large volume of traffic is already presupposed. It is the same presupposition *doubly*: On one side, the wealth of the country sufficiently concentrated and transformed into the form of capital, to allow it to undertake such works as realization processes for capital; on the other side the volume of traffic sufficient, and the barrier formed by the lack of means of communication sufficiently felt as such, to allow the capitalist to realize the value of the road (in instalments over time) as road (i.e. its use). All *general conditions* of *production*, such as roads, canals, etc., whether they facilitate circulation or even make it possible at all, or whether []{#p531} they increase the force of production (such as irrigation works etc. as in Asia and, incidentally, as still built by governments in Europe), presuppose, in order to be undertaken by capital instead of by the government which represents the community as such, the highest development of production founded on capital. The separation of *public works* from the state, and their migration into the domain of the works undertaken by capital itself, indicates the degree to which the real community has constituted itself in the form of capital. A country, e.g. the United States, may feel the need for railways in connection with production; nevertheless the direct advantage arising from them for production may be too small for the investment to appear as anything but *sunk capital.* Then capital shifts the burden on to the shoulders of the state; or, where the state traditionally still takes up a position superior to capital, it still possesses the authority and the will to force the society of capitalists to put a part of their *revenue,* not of their capital, into such generally useful works, which appear at the same time as *general* conditions of production, and hence not as *particular* conditions for one capitalist or another -- and, so long as capital does not adopt the form of the joint-stock company, it always looks out only for its *particular* conditions of realization, and shifts the *communal* conditions off on to the whole country as national requirements. Capital undertakes only *advantageous* undertakings, advantageous in its sense. True, it also speculates unsoundly, and, as we shall see, *must* do so. It then undertakes *investments* which do not pay, and which pay only as soon as they have become to a certain degree *devalued.* Hence the many undertakings where the first *investment* is sunk and lost, the first entrepreneurs go bankrupt -- and begin to realize themselves only at second or third hand, where the invested capital has become smaller owing to *devaluation.* Incidentally, the state itself and everything connected with it belongs with these deductions from *revenue,* belongs so to speak to the *consumption costs* for the individual, the production costs for society. A road itself may so increase the force of production that it creates new traffic which then makes the road profitable. There are works and investments which may be necessary without being productive in the capitalist sense, i.e. without the realization of the *surplus labour* contained in them through circulation, through exchange, as *surplus value.* If a worker works e.g. 12 hours per day for a year building a road, []{#p532} and if the generally necessary labour time is = 6 hours on the average, then he works a surplus time of 6 hours. But if the road cannot be sold for 12 hours, perhaps only for 6, then this road construction is not an undertaking for capital, and road building is not productive labour for it. Capital must be able to sell the road (the timing and mode of the sale are beside the point here) in such a way that both the necessary and the surplus labour are realized, or in such a way that it obtains out of the general fund of profits -- of surplus values -- a sufficiently large share to make it the same as if it had created surplus value. *This relation* is to be examined *later in connection with profit and necessary labour.* The highest development of capital exists when the general conditions of the process of social production are not paid out of *deductions from the social revenue*, the state's taxes -- where revenue and not capital appears as the labour fund, and where the worker, although he is a free wage worker like any other, nevertheless stands economically in a different relation -- but rather out of *capital as capital.* This shows the degree to which capital has subjugated all conditions of social production to itself, on one side; and, on the other side, hence, the extent to which social reproductive wealth has been *capitalized,* and all needs are satisfied through the exchange form; as well as the extent to which the *socially posited* needs of the individual, i.e. those which he consumes and feels not as a single individual in society, but communally with others -- whose mode of consumption is social by the nature of the thing -- are likewise not only consumed but also produced through exchange, individual exchange. In the case of the above road, road building must be so advantageous that the transformation of a given amount of labour time into the road must reproduce the worker's labour capacity to the same degree as if he transformed it into cultivated fields. Value is determined by objectified labour time, whatever form it may take. But it does depend now on the use value in which it is realized, whether this *value is* realizable. It is presupposed here that the road is a requirement for the commune, hence the use value is presupposed. For capital, on the other side, if it is to undertake the building of the road, it must be presupposed that not only the *necessary labour time* but also the *surplus labour time* worked by the worker can be paid for -- this is where his profit comes from. (The capitalist often compels this payment by means of protective tariffs, monopoly, state coercion; while the individuals engaged in []{#p533} exchange, under conditions of free exchange, would *at most* pay the necessary labour.) It is very possible that surplus labour time is present but not paid for (which can after all happen to every capitalist). *Where capital rules* (just as where there is slavery and bondage or serfdom of any sort), *the worker's absolute labour time is posited for him as condition of being allowed to work the necessary labour time, i.e. of being allowed to realize the labour time necessary for the maintenance of his labour capacity in use values for himself.* Competition then has the result, in every kind of work, that he must work the full time -- i.e. surplus labour time. But it may be the case that this surplus labour time, although present in the product, is not exchangeable. For the worker himself -- compared with the other wage workers -- it is surplus labour. For the employer, it is labour which, while it has a use value for him, like e.g. his cook, has no exchange value, hence the entire distinction between *necessary and surplus labour time* does not exist. Labour may be necessary without being productive. All *general, communal* conditions of production -- so long as their production cannot yet be accomplished by capital as such and under its conditions -- are therefore paid for out of a part of the country's revenue -- out of the government's treasury -- and the workers do not appear as productive workers, even though they increase the productive force of capital.

[\*](#pagenoter529_4){#pagenote529_4} If the state lets this sort of matter be conducted through *state-contractors,* then this still always takes place indirectly through the *corvée* or taxes.

[†](#pagenoter530){#pagenote530} *Competition* is better suited to create the necessity of e.g. the railway in a country where the previous development of its forces of production would not yet push so far. The effect of *competition among nations* belongs in the section on *international intercourse.* The civilizing influences of capital particularly show themselves here.

The result of our digression is, incidentally, that the production of the means of communication, of the physical conditions of circulation, is put into the category of the production of fixed capital, and hence does not constitute a special case. Meanwhile, and incidentally, there opened up for us the prospect, which cannot be sharply defined yet at this point, *of a specific relation of capital to the communal, general conditions of social production,* as distinct from the conditions of a *particular capital* and its *particular production* process.

##### *Transport to market (spatial condition of circulation) belongs in the production process. Credit, the temporal moment of circulation. -- Capital is circulating capital. -- Money circulation a mere illusion. -- Sismondi. Cherbuliez. (Capital. Its various component parts)*

*Circulation proceeds in space and time.* Economically considered, the spatial condition, the bringing of the product to the market, []{#p534} belongs to the production process itself. The product is really finished only when it is on the market. The movement through which it gets there belongs still with the cost of making it. It does not form a necessary moment of circulation, regarded as a particular value-process, since a product may be bought and even consumed at the point of its production. But this spatial moment is important in so far as the expansion of the market and the exchangeability of the product are connected with it. The reduction of the costs of this *real* circulation (in space) belongs to the development of the forces of production by capital, the reduction of the costs of its realization. In certain respects, as an external condition for the existence of the economic process of circulation, this moment may also be reckoned as part of the *production costs* of circulation, so that, with respect to this moment, circulation itself appears as a moment not only of the production process in general, but also of the direct production process. In any case, what appears here is the determination of this moment by the general degree of development of the productive forces, and of production based on capital generally. This locational moment -- the bringing of the product to market, which is a necessary condition of its circulation, except when the point of production is itself a market -- could more precisely be regarded as the transformation of the product *into a commodity.* Only on the market is it a *commodity.* (Whether or not this forms a particular moment is a matter of chance. If capital produces to order, then neither this moment nor the transformation into money exists as a particular moment for it. *Work done to order,* i.e. supply corresponding to a prior demand, as a *general or predominant situation,* is not characteristic of large industry and in no way arises from the nature of capital as a condition.)

*Secondly, the temporal moment.* This is an essential part of the concept of circulation. Suppose the act of making the transition from commodity to money is fixed by contract, then this still requires time -- calculating, weighing, measuring. The abbreviation of this moment is likewise development of productive force. However, this is time still conceived only as an *external* condition for the transition from the state of money into that of commodity; the transition itself is presupposed; the question is the time which *elapses during this presupposed act.* This belongs to the *cost of production.* Quite different is the time which generally passes before the commodity makes its transition into money; []{#p535} or the time during which it remains a *commodity,* only a potential but not a real value. This is pure loss.

It is clear from everything said above that circulation appears as an essential process of capital. The production process cannot be begun anew before the transformation of the commodity into money. The *constant continuity* of the process, the unobstructed and fluid transition of value from one form into the other, or from one phase of the process into the next, appears as a fundamental condition for production based on capital to a much greater degree than for all earlier forms of production. On another side, while the necessity of this continuity is given, its phases are separate in time and space, and appear as particular, mutually indifferent processes. It thus appears as a matter of chance for production based on capital whether or not its essential condition, the continuity of the different processes which constitute its process as a whole, is actually brought about. The suspension of this chance element by capital itself is *credit.* (It has other aspects as well; but this aspect arises out of the direct nature of the production process and is hence the foundation of the necessity of credit.) Which is why *credit* in any developed form appears in no earlier mode of production. There was borrowing and lending in earlier situations as well, and usury is even the oldest of the antediluvian forms of capital. But borrowing and lending no more constitute *credit* than working constitutes *industrial labour* or *free wage labour.* And credit as an essential, developed relation of production appears *historically* only in circulation based on capital or on wage labour. *(Money* itself is a form for suspending the unevenness of the times required in different branches of production, to the extent that this obstructs exchange.) Although *usury* is itself a form of credit in its *bourgeoisified* form, the form *adapted to capital,* in its pre-bourgeois form it is rather the *expression of lack of credit.*

(The retransformation of money into objective moments or conditions of production presupposes the latters' *availability.* It constitutes the various *markets* where the producer encounters them as commodity -- in the hands of a merchant -- markets which (alongside the labour market) are essentially distinct from the markets for direct, individual, final consumption.)

Money became transformed into commodity through circulation, and in the exchange of M--C, consumption completed the process; or, the commodity was exchanged for money -- and []{#p536} in the exchange C--M, M was either a vanishing moment itself to be exchanged for C again, in which case the process ended with consumption again, or the money withdrew from circulation and transformed itself into dead treasure, merely symbolic wealth. At no point did the process ignite from within, but rather the presuppositions of money circulation lay outside it, and it constantly required a new push from the outside. In so far as both moments were exchanged, their change of form within circulation was merely formal. But in so far as content entered in, it dropped out of the economic process; content did not form a part of it. The commodity did not sustain itself as money, nor the money as commodity; each was either one or the other. Value as such did not sustain itself in and through circulation as predominant over the process of its transformation, its metamorphosis; nor was the *use value* itself (as is the case in the capital production process) produced by the *exchange value.* With capital the consumption of the commodity is itself not final; it falls within the production process; it itself appears as a moment of production, i.e. of *value-positing* \[*Wertsetzen*\].

Capital is now posited, however, as not merely sustaining itself formally, but as *realizing itself as value,* as value relating to itself as value in every one of the moments of its metamorphosis, in which it appears at one time as money, at another time as commodity, then again as exchange value, then again as use value. The passage from one moment to the other appears as a particular process, but each of these processes is the transition to the other. Capital is thus posited as value-in-process, which is capital in every moment.[^25] It is thus posited as *circulating capital;* in every moment capital, and circulating from one form into the next. The point of return is at the same time the point of departure and vice versa -- namely the *capitalist.* All capital is originally circulating capital, product of circulation, as well as producing circulation, tracing in this way its own course. From the present standpoint, money circulation now appears as itself merely a moment of the circulation of capital, and its independence is posited as a mere *semblance.* It appears as determined on all sides by the circulation of capital, to which we shall return. In so far as it forms an independent motion alongside that of capital, []{#p537} this independence is posited only by the *continuity* of the circulation of capital, so that this one moment may be held constant and regarded for itself.

\<'Capital a permanent, *self-multiplying* value which never decays. This *value* tears itself loose from the commodity which created it; remains, like a *metaphysical, insubstantial quality,* always in the possession of the same farmer,' (e.g.), 'for whom it cloaks itself in different forms.' (Sism. VI.)[^26] 'In the exchange of labour for capital, the worker demands subsistence *in order to live;* the capitalist demands *work in order to make a profit.'* (Sism. loc. cit.) 'The master of the workshop gains, makes a profit from every *increase in the powers of production* which the *division of labour* brings about.' (loc. cit.)[^27] 'Sale of labour = renunciation of all fruits of labour.' (Cherbuliez, ch. XXVIII.)[^28] 'The three component parts of capital do not grow evenly' (i.e. *matière première,* instrument, *approvisionnement*),[^29] 'nor are they in the *same relation* in the different stages of society. The *approvisionnement* remains the same for a certain period, regardless of how quickly the *speed of production* and consequently the *quantity of products* may increase. Thus an increase of *productive capital* does not necessarily entail an increase of the *approvisionnement* which is destined to form the price of labour; it can be accompanied by a reduction of it.' (loc. cit.)[^30]\>

##### *Influence of circulation on the determination of value. -- Circulation time = time of devaluation. -- Difference between the capitalist mode of production and all earlier ones (universality etc.). Propagandistic nature of capital. -- Abbreviation of circulation (credit). -- Storch. -- What the capitalist advances is labour. (Malthus.) -- Barriers to capitalist production. (Thompson)*[^31]

\<In as much as the renewal of production depends on the sale of the finished products; transformation of the commodity into money and retransformation of money into the conditions of []{#p538} production -- raw material, instrument, wages; in as much as the circuits which capital travels in order to go from one of these forms into the other constitute sections of circulation, and these sections are travelled in specific *amounts of time* (even spatial distance reduces itself to time; the important thing e.g. is not the market's distance in space, but the speed -- the amount of time -- with which it can be reached), by that much the velocity of circulation, the *time* in which it is accomplished, is a determinant of how many products can be produced in a given period of time; how often capital can be realized in a given period of time, how often it can *reproduce* and *multiply* its value. Thus a moment enters *into value-determination* which indeed does not come out of the direct relation of labour to capital. The frequency with which the same capital can repeat the production process (creation of new value) in a given period of time is evidently a condition not posited directly by the production process itself. Thus, while circulation does not itself produce a moment of *value-determination,* for that lies exclusively in labour, its speed does determine the speed with which the production process is repeated, values are created -- thus, if not *values,* at least to a certain extent the mass of values. Namely, the values and surplus values posited by the production process, multiplied by the number of repetitions of the production process in a given period of time. When we speak of the velocity of the circulation of capital, we postulate that delays in the transition from one phase to the next arise only from *external barriers,* not such as arise from the production process and circulation itself (such as crises, overproduction etc.). Thus, in addition to the labour time realized in production, the *circulation time* of capital enters in as a moment of value creation -- of productive labour time itself. While labour time appears as value-positing activity, this circulation time of capital appears as the *time of devaluation.* The difference shows itself simply in this: if the totality of the labour time commanded by capital is set at its maximum, say infinity, ∞, so that necessary labour time forms an infinitely small part and surplus labour time an infinitely large part of this \[infinity\], then this would be the maximum realization of capital, and this is the tendency towards which it strives. On the other side, if the *circulation time of capital* were = 0, if the various stages of its transformation proceeded as rapidly in reality as in the mind, then that[^32] would likewise be the maximum of the []{#p539} factor by which the production process could be repeated, i.e. the number of capital realization processes in a given period of time. The repetition of the production process would be restricted only by the amount of time which it lasts, the amount of time which elapses during the transformation of raw material into product. *Circulation time* is therefore not a positive value-creating element; if it were = to 0, then value-creation would be at its maximum. But if either surplus labour time or necessary labour time = 0, i.e. if necessary labour time absorbed all time, or if production could proceed altogether *without* labour, then neither value, nor capital, nor value-creation would exist. *Circulation time* therefore determines value only in so far as it appears as a *natural barrier* to the realization of labour time. It is therefore in fact a deduction from *surplus labour time,* i.e. an increase of *necessary labour time.* It is clear that necessary labour time has to be paid for, whether the circulation process proceeds slowly or quickly. E.g. in trades where specific workers are required, who can, however, only be employed for a part of the year because the products are, say, saleable only in a given season, \[in those trades\] the workers would have to be paid for the entire year, i.e. surplus labour time is decreased in exact proportion to the reduction in their possibilities of employment during a given period of time, but still they must be paid in one way or another. (For example in the form that their wages for 4 months suffice to maintain them for a year.) If capital could utilize them for 12 months, it would pay them no higher, and would have gained that much surplus labour. *Circulation time thus appears as a barrier to the productivity of labour =* an increase in necessary labour time = a decrease in surplus labour time = a decrease in surplus value = an obstruction, a barrier to the self-realization process \[*Selbstverwertungsprozess*\] of capital. Thus, while capital must on one side strive to tear down every spatial barrier to intercourse, i.e. to exchange, and conquer the whole earth for its market, it strives on the other side to annihilate this space with time, i.e. to reduce to a minimum the time spent in motion from one place to another. The more developed the capital, therefore, the more extensive the market over which it circulates, which forms the spatial orbit of its circulation, the more does it strive simultaneously for an even greater extension of the market and for greater annihilation of space by time. (If labour time is regarded not as the working day of the individual worker, but as the indefinite working day of an []{#p540} indefinite number of workers, then all *relations of population* come in here; the basic doctrines of population are therefore just as much contained in this first chapter on capital as are those of profit, price, credit etc.) There appears here the universalizing tendency of capital, which distinguishes it from all previous stages of production. Although limited by its very nature, it strives towards the universal development of the forces of production, and thus becomes the presupposition of a new mode of production, which is founded not on the development of the forces of production for the purpose of reproducing or at most expanding a given condition, but where the free, unobstructed, progressive and universal development of the forces of production is itself the presupposition of society and hence of its reproduction; where advance beyond the point of departure is the only presupposition. This tendency -- which capital possesses, but which at the same time, since capital is a limited form of production, contradicts it and hence drives it towards dissolution -- distinguishes capital from all earlier modes of production, and at the same time contains this element, that capital is posited as a mere point of transition. All previous forms of society -- or, what is the same, of the forces of social production -- foundered on the development of wealth. Those thinkers of antiquity who were possessed of consciousness therefore directly denounced wealth as the dissolution of the community. The feudal system, for its part, foundered on urban industry, trade, modern agriculture (even as a result of individual inventions like gunpowder and the printing press). With the development of wealth -- and hence also new powers and expanded intercourse on the part of individuals -- the economic conditions on which the community rested were dissolved, along with the political relations of the various constituents of the community which corresponded to those conditions: religion, in which it was viewed in idealized form (and both \[religion and political relations\] rested in turn on a given relation to nature, into which all productive force resolves itself); the character, outlook etc. of the individuals. The *development of science alone --* i.e. the most solid form of wealth, both its product and its producer -- was sufficient to dissolve these communities. But the *development of science,* this ideal and at the same time practical wealth, is only one aspect, one form in which the *development of the human productive forces,* i.e. of wealth, appears. Considered *ideally,* the dissolution of a given form of []{#p541} consciousness sufficed to kill a whole epoch. In reality, this barrier to consciousness corresponds to a *definite degree of development of the forces of material production* and hence of wealth. True, there was not only a development on the old basis, but also a *development of this basis itself.* The highest development of this *basis* itself (the flower into which it transforms itself; but it is always *this* basis, *this* plant as flower; hence wilting *after* the flowering and as consequence of the flowering) is the point at which it is itself worked out, developed, into the form in which it is compatible with the *highest development of the forces of production,* hence also the richest development of the individuals. As soon as this point is reached, the further development appears as decay, and the new development begins from a new basis. We saw earlier that property in the conditions of production was posited as identical with a limited, definite form of the community; hence of the individual with the characteristics -- limited characteristics and limited development of his productive forces -- required to form such a community. This presupposition was itself in turn the result of a limited historic stage of the development of the productive forces; of wealth as well as of the mode of creating it. The purpose of the community, of the individual -- as well as the condition of production -- \[is\] *the reproduction of these specific conditions of production* and of the individuals, both singly and in their social groupings and relations -- as living carriers of these conditions. Capital posits the *production of wealth* itself and hence the universal development of the productive forces, the constant overthrow of its prevailing presuppositions, as the presupposition of its reproduction. Value excludes no use value; i.e. includes no particular kind of consumption etc., of intercourse etc. as absolute condition; and likewise every degree of the development of the social forces of production, of intercourse, of knowledge etc. appears to it only as a barrier which it strives to overpower. Its own presupposition -- value -- is posited as product, not as a loftier presupposition hovering over production. The barrier to *capital* is that this entire development proceeds in a contradictory way, and that the working-out of the productive forces, of general wealth etc., knowledge etc., appears in such a way that the working individual *alienates* himself \[*sich entäussert*\]; relates to the conditions brought out of him by his labour as those not of his *own* but of an *alien wealth* and of his own poverty. But this antithetical form is itself fleeting, and produces the real conditions []{#p542} of its own suspension. The result is: the tendentially and potentially general development of the forces of production -- of wealth as such -- as a basis; likewise, the universality of intercourse, hence the world market as a basis. The basis as the possibility of the universal development of the individual, and the real development of the individuals from this basis as a constant suspension of its *barrier,* which is recognized as a barrier, not taken for a *sacred limit.* Not an ideal or imagined universality of the individual, but the universality of his real and ideal relations. Hence also the grasping of his own history as a *process,* and the recognition of nature (equally present as practical power over nature) as his real body. The process of development itself posited and known as the presupposition of the same.[^33] For this, however, necessary above all that the full development of the forces of production has become the *condition of production;* and not that specific *conditions of production* are posited as a limit to the development of the productive forces. --

If we now return to the *circulation time* of capital, then its abbreviation (except for development of the means of communication and transport required to bring the product to market) \[means\] in part the *creation* of a continuous and hence an ever more extensive market; and in part the development of *economic* relations, development of forms of capital, by means of which it *artificially* abbreviates the circulation time. *(All forms of credit.)* \<It may be further remarked at this point that, since capital alone possesses the conditions of the production of capital, hence satisfies and strives to realize \[them\], \[it is\] a general tendency of capital at all points which are presuppositions of circulation, which form its productive centres, to assimilate these points into itself, i.e. to transform them into capitalizing production or production of capital. This propagandistic (civilizing) tendency a property exclusively of capital -- as distinct from the earlier conditions of production.\> The modes of production where circulation does not form the immanent, dominant condition of production, naturally \[do\] not \[meet\] the specific circulation requirements of capital and hence also do not \[provide for\] the working-out of the economic forms as well as of the real forces of production corresponding to them. -- Production based on capital originally came out of circulation; we now see that it posits []{#p543} circulation as its own condition, and likewise the production process in its immediacy as moment of the circulation process, as well as the circulation process as one phase of the production process in its totality. -- In so far as different capitals have different circulation times (e.g. one a more distant market, the other a near one; one a guaranteed transformation into money, the other a risky one; one more fixed capital, the other more circulating capital), this makes for differences among them in realization. But this happens only in the secondary realization process. Circulation time in itself is a *barrier* to realization (*necessary labour time* is of course also a barrier; but at the same time an element, since value and capital would vanish without it); \[it is a\] deduction from surplus labour time or an increase in *necessary labour time* in relation to *surplus labour time.* The circulation of capital *realizes value,* while living labour *creates value.* Circulation time is only a barrier to this realization of value, and, to that extent, to value creation; a barrier arising not from production generally but specific to production of capital, the suspension of which -- or the struggle against which -- hence also belongs to the specific economic development of capital and gives the impulse for the development of its forms in credit etc. \<Capital itself is the contradiction \[, in\] that, while it constantly tries to suspend *necessary labour time* (and this is at the same time the reduction of the worker to a minimum, i.e. his existence as mere living labour capacity), *surplus labour time* exists only in antithesis with necessary labour time, so that capital posits necessary labour time as a *necessary* condition of its reproduction and realization. At a certain point, a development of the forces of material production -- which is at the same time a development of the forces of the working class -- *suspends capital itself.*\>

\<'The entrepreneur can resume production only after he has sold the completed product, and has employed the price for the purchase of new materials and wages: thus, the more prompt circulation is in bringing about these two effects, the more is he capable of beginning his production anew, and the more products does the capital supply in a given period of time.' (Storch, 34.)[^34]\> \<'The specific *advances of the capitalist* do not consist of cloth etc., but of labour.' (Malthus, IX, 26.)[^35]\> \<'The accumulation []{#p544} of the general capital of the community in other hands \[than\] those of the operative labourers, necessarily retards the progress of all industry save that of the usual remuneration of capital, which the time and circumstances afford to the holders of the capital ... In the previous systems, the *force of production regarded in reference to and subordinate to actual accumulations,* and to the perpetuating of the existing modes of distribution. Actual accumulation and distribution are subordinate to the power of producing.' (Thompson, 3.)[^36]\>

##### *Circulation and creation of value. (Equalization between different capitals in the conditions of circulation.) Capital not a source of value-creation. -- Circulation costs. -- Continuity of production presupposes suspension of circulation time*

It follows from the relation of circulation time to the production process that the sum of values produced, or the total realization of capital in a given epoch, is determined not simply by the new value which it creates in the production process, or by the surplus time realized in the production process, but rather by this surplus time (surplus value) multiplied by the number which expresses how often the production process of capital can be repeated within a given period of time. The number which expresses this frequency of repetition may be regarded as the coefficient of the production process or of the surplus value created through it. However, this coefficient is not positively but negatively determined by the velocity of circulation. I.e. if the velocity of circulation were absolute, i.e. if no interruption in production resulting from circulation occurred at all, then this coefficient would be at its maximum. If the real conditions of e.g. wheat production in a given country permit only one harvest, then no velocity of circulation can make two harvests out of it. But if an obstruction in the circulation occurred, if the farmer could not sell his wheat soon enough e.g. to hire workers again, then production would be delayed. The maximum of the coefficient of the production process or the realization process in a given period of time is determined by the absolute time taken up by the production phase itself. With circulation completed, capital is able to begin its []{#p545} production process anew. Thus if circulation caused no delay at all, if its velocity were absolute and its duration = 0, i.e. if it were accomplished in no time, then this would only be the same as if *capital* had been able to begin its production process anew directly it was finished; i.e. circulation would not have existed as a limiting barrier for production, and the repetition of the production process in a given period of time would be absolutely dependent on, identical with, the duration of the production process. Thus if the development of industry allowed *x* lb. of twist to be produced in 4 months with a capital of 100, then with that capital the production process could be repeated only 3 times per year, and only 3*x* lb. of twist could be produced. No velocity of circulation could increase the reproduction of capital, or rather the repetition of its realization process, beyond that point. That could occur only in consequence of an *increase in the forces of production.* Circulation time in itself is not a *productive force* of capital, but a *barrier to its productive force* arising from its nature as exchange value. The passage through the various phases of circulation here appears as a *barrier to production,* a barrier posited by the specific nature of capital itself. All that can happen through the acceleration and abbreviation of *circulation time --* of the circulation process -- is the reduction of the barrier posited by the nature of capital. The natural barriers to the repetition of the production process e.g. in agriculture coincide with the duration of one cycle of the production phase. The barrier posited by capital is the lag not between seeding and harvest, but between harvest and the transformation of the harvest into money, and retransformation of the money into say e.g. purchase of labour. The circulation-artists who imagine that they can do something with the velocity of circulation other than lessen the obstacles to reproduction posited by capital itself are on the wrong track. (Even madder, of course, are those circulation-artists who imagine that credit institutes and inventions which abolish the lag of circulation time will not only do away with the delays and interruptions in production caused by the transformation of the finished product into capital, but will also make the capital, with which productive capital exchanges, itself superfluous; i.e. they want to produce on the basis of exchange value but to remove at the same time, by some witchcraft, the necessary conditions of production on this basis.) The most that credit can do in this respect -- as regards []{#p546} *mere* circulation -- is maintain the continuity of the production process, *if* all other conditions of this continuity are present, i.e. if the capital to be exchanged with actually exists etc.

It is posited in the circulation process that the transformation of the capital into money is posited as a condition for the realization of capital through production, for the exploitation of labour by capital; or, the exchange of capital for capital [\*](#pagenote546){#pagenoter546} is posited as barrier to the exchange of capital for labour and vice versa.

[\*](#pagenoter546){#pagenote546} For from the present standpoint we still only have labour or capital at all points of circulation.

Capital exists as capital only in so far as it passes through the phases of circulation, the various moments of its transformation, in order to be able to begin the production process anew, and these phases are themselves phases of its realization -- but at the same time, as we saw, of its *devaluation.* As long as capital remains frozen in the form of the finished product, it cannot be active as capital, it is *negated* capital. Its realization process is delayed in the same degree, and its value-in-process \[*prozessierender Wert*\] negated. This thus appears as a loss for capital, as a relative loss of its value, for its value consists precisely in its realization process. This loss of capital means in other words nothing else but that time passes it by unseized, time during which it could have been appropriating alien labour, *surplus labour time* through exchange with living labour, if the deadlock had not occurred. Now let us imagine *many* capitals in particular branches of business, all of which are *necessary* (which would become evident if, in the eventuality of a massive flight of capital from a given branch, supply falling below demand, the market price would therefore rise above the natural price in that branch), and let a single branch of business require e.g. that capital A remain longer in the form of devaluation, i.e. that the time in which it passes through the various phases of circulation is longer than in all other branches of business, in which case this capital A would regard the smaller new value which it could produce as a positive loss, just as if it had so many more outlays to make in order to produce the same value. It would thus charge relatively more exchange value for its products than the other capitals, in order to share the same rate of gain. But this could take place in fact only if the loss were distributed among the other capitals. If A demands more exchange value for the product than there is labour objectified in it, then []{#p547} it can obtain this *more* only if the others obtain less than the real value of their products. That is, the less favourable conditions under which A has produced would be borne in proportional shares by all the capitalists who exchange with it, and in this way an equal average level would come out. But the sum of the surplus value created by all these capitals together would be lessened exactly by the amount of capital A's lesser realization in relation to the other capitals; only, instead of this reduction falling exclusively on capital A, it is borne as a general loss, as a loss shared proportionally by all the capitals. Nothing can therefore be more ridiculous than the notion (see e.g. Ramsay)[^37] that, apart from the exploitation of labour, capital forms an *original* source, separately from labour, of *value-creation,* because the distribution of surplus labour among the capitals takes place not in proportion to the surplus labour time achieved by the individual capital, but in proportion to the *total surplus labour* which the totality of capitals achieved, and hence a higher value-creation can be attributed to the *individual capital* than is directly explicable from its *particular* exploitation of labour power. But this *more* on one side has to be compensated by a *less* on the other. This is what *average* means, if it means anything at all. The question how the relation of capital to alien capital, i.e. the competition of capitals, distributes the surplus value among them obviously has nothing to do with the absolute amount of this surplus value. Nothing more absurd, then, than to conclude that, because one capital obtains a compensation for its *exceptional* circulation time, i.e. puts its relatively lesser realization to account as positively greater realization, now all *capitals* combined, *capital* can make something out of nothing, make a plus out of a minus, make a plus-surplus value out of a minus-surplus value or out of minus-surplus labour time, and that it possesses, therefore, a *mystical* wellspring of value independent of the appropriation of alien labour. The manner in which the capitals among other things compute their proportional share of the *surplus value --* not only according to the surplus labour time which they set in motion, but also *in accordance with the time which their capital has worked as such,* i.e. lain fallow, found itself in the phase of devaluation -- does of course not alter in the least the total sum of the surplus value which they have to distribute among themselves. This sum itself cannot grow by being smaller than it would have []{#p548} been if capital A, instead of lying fallow, had created surplus value; i.e. by having created less surplus value in the same time as the other capitalists. And this *lying-fallow* is made good for capital A only in so far as it arises necessarily out of the conditions of the particular branch of production, and hence appears in respect to *capital as such* as a burden on realization, as a *necessary barrier* to its realization generally. The division of labour leaves this barrier as a barrier only as regards the production process of this particular capital. If the production process is regarded as conducted by capital as such, this lying-fallow is a *general barrier* to capital's realization. If one imagines all production carried out by labour alone, then all the larger advances which it requires during its realization appear as what they are -- *deductions from surplus value.*

Circulation can *create value* only in so far as it requires fresh employment -- of *alien labour --* in addition to that directly consumed in the production process. This is then the same as if more *necessary labour* were used in the direct production process. Only the actual *circulation costs* increase the *value* of the product, but decrease the surplus value.

To the extent that the circulation of capital (the product etc.) does not merely express the phases necessary to begin the production process anew, this circulation (see Storch's example) does not form a moment of production in its totality -- is hence not circulation posited by production, and, in so far as it creates expenses, these are *faux frais de production.*[^38] The costs of circulation generally, in so far as their merely economic moments, circulation proper, are concerned (bringing the product to market gives it a *new use value),* are to be regarded as deduction from *surplus value,* i.e. as an increase of necessary labour in relation to surplus labour.

The continuity of production presupposes that circulation time has been suspended. If it has not been suspended, then time must pass between the different metamorphoses through which capital must travel; its circulation time *must* appear as deduction from its production time. On the other hand, the nature of capital presupposes that it travels through the different phases of circulation not as it does in the mind, where one concept turns into the next at the speed of thought, in no time, but rather as situations which are separate in time. It must spend some time as a cocoon before it can []{#p549} take off as a butterfly. Thus the conditions of production arising out of the nature of capital itself contradict each other. The contradiction can be suspended and overcome only [\*](#pagenote549){#pagenoter549} in two ways:

*Firstly, credit*: A pseudo-buyer B -- i.e. someone who really *pays* but does not really buy -- mediates the transformation of capitalist A's product into money. But B himself is paid only after capitalist C has bought A's product. Whether the money which this credit-man, B, gives to A is used by A to buy labour or to buy raw material and instrument, before A can replace either of them from the sale of his product, does not alter the case. Given our presupposition, he must basically give him both -- i.e. all the conditions of production (these represent, however, a greater value than the original ones with which A began the production process). In this case capital B replaces capital A; but they are not realized at the same time. Now B takes the place of A; i.e. his capital lies fallow, until it is exchanged with capital C. It is frozen in the product of A, who has made his product liquid in capital B.

[]{#iiie4}

[\*](#pagenoter549){#pagenote549} Except if one imagines that all capitals produce to order for each other, and that the product is therefore always immediately money, a notion which contradicts the nature of capital and hence also the practice of large-scale industry.

##### *Ramsay. Circulation time. Concludes therefore that capital is its own source of profit. -- Ramsay. Confusion about surplus value and profit and law of values. (No surplus value according to Ricardo's law.) -- Ricardo. Competition. -- Quincey.[^39] Ricardo's theory of value. Wages and profit.* Quincey. -- Ricardo. -- Wakefield. *Conditions of capitalist production \[in\] colonies*

The economists' absolute confusion in respect of Ricardo's determination of value through labour time -- something which is founded on a basic defect of his own development -- emerges very clearly with Mr Ramsay. He says (after having previously drawn, from the influence of the circulation time of capitals on their *relative realization,* i.e. their relative share of the general surplus value, the nonsensical conclusion that: 'This shows how capital []{#p550} may regulate value independently of labour' (IX, 84. R, 43)[^40] or 'that capital is a source of value independent of labour'[^41]) -- he says, literally: 'A circulating capital *(approvisionnement)* will always maintain more labour than that formerly bestowed upon itself. Because, could it employ no more than had been previously bestowed upon itself, *what advantage* could arise to the owner from the use of it *as such?'* (loc. cit. 49.) 'Given two capitals of equal value, each produced through the labour of 100 men operating for a given time, of which the one is entirely circulating, the other entirely fixed, and may perhaps consist of wine kept to improve. Now, this circulating capital, *raised by the labour of 100 men, will set 150 men in motion.* Therefore the product at the end of the coming year will in this case be the result of the labour of 150 men. But still it will be of no more value than the wine at the termination of the same period, although only 100 men employed upon the latter.' (50.) 'Or is it asserted that the quantity of labour which every circulating capital *will employ* is no more than equal to the \[quantity\] previously bestowed upon it? That would mean, that the *value of the capital expended =* that of the product.' (52.) Great confusion between the labour bestowed upon capital and that which it will employ. The capital which is exchanged for labour capacity, the *approvisionnement --* and this he here calls *circulating capital --* can never employ more labour than has been bestowed upon it. (The reaction of a development of the productive forces on present capital is beside the point here.) But there has been more labour bestowed upon it than it has paid for -- *surplus labour,* which is converted into *surplus value and surplus produce,* enabling the capital to renew this profitable bargain, where the mutuality is all on one side, on a more enlarged scale. It is enabled to employ more new living labour, because during the process of production a portion of fresh labour has been bestowed upon it beyond the accumulated labour of which it consisted before entering that process.

Mr Ramsay seems to imagine that, if a capital is the product of 20 working days (necessary and surplus together), this product of 20 working days can employ 30 working days. But this is by no means the case. Say that 10 days of necessary labour and 10 surplus days were employed on the product. Then the surplus value = 10 []{#p551} surplus days. If the capitalist then exchanges these again for raw material, instrument and labour, then he can set new *necessary labour* into motion with the *surplus product.* The point is not that he employed more labour time than is present in the product, but that he exchanges the surplus labour time, which costs him nothing, for new necessary labour time -- in other words, precisely, that he employs the *entire labour time* bestowed upon the product, while he has paid only part of that labour. Mr Ramsay's conclusion, that if the quantity of labour which every circulating capital will employ was no more than equal to that previously bestowed upon it, the value of the capital expended would be equal to that of the produce, i.e. no surplus value would be left, would be correct only if the quantity of labour bestowed upon the capital *were wholly paid for,* i.e. if capital did not appropriate a part of the labour *without equivalent.* These misunderstandings on Ricardo's part[^42] obviously arise from the fact that he himself was not clear about the process, nor, as a bourgeois, could he be. Insight into this process is = to the statement that capital is not only, as A. Smith thinks,[^43] command over alien labour, in the sense that every exchange value is that, since it gives its possessor *buying power,* but that it is the power to appropriate alien labour *without exchange, without equivalent,* but with the semblance of exchange. Ricardo knows no argument to refute those, like A. Smith and others, who fall into the same error regarding value as determined by labour, and value as determined by the price of labour (wages), other than to say: with the product of the same quantity of labour one can set sometimes more and sometimes less living labour into motion, i.e. he regards the product of labour in respect of the worker only as *use value --* only the part of the product which he needs to be able to live as worker. But how it comes about that the worker suddenly only represents *use value* in the exchange, or only draws use value from the exchange, is by no means clear to him, as is already proved by his arguments against A. Smith, which are never in general terms, but always about particular examples. But why is it, then, that the share of the worker in the value of the product is determined not by the value, but rather by the use value of the product, thus not by the labour time employed on it, []{#p552} but by its quality of maintaining living labour capacity? If he tries to explain this with, say, competition among the workers, then the answer which would have to be given is the same as that which he gives A. Smith about competition among capitalists, i.e. that competition may well even out, equalize the level of profit, but in no way creates the measure of this level.[^44] Likewise, competition among the workers could press down a higher wages level etc., but the general standard of wages, or as Ricardo puts it the natural price of wages, could not be explained by the competition between worker and worker, but only by the original relation between capital and labour. Competition generally, this essential locomotive force of the bourgeois economy, does not establish its laws, but is rather their executor. Unlimited competition is therefore not the presupposition for the truth of the economic laws, but rather the consequence -- the form of appearance in which their necessity realizes itself. For the economists to presuppose, as does Ricardo, that unlimited competition exists[^45] is to presuppose the full reality and realization of the bourgeois relations of production in their specific and distinct character. Competition therefore does not *explain* these laws; rather, it lets them be *seen,* but does not produce them. Then Ricardo says, too: the production costs of living labour depend on the production costs of making the values required to reproduce it.[^46] While he previously regarded the product in relation to the worker only as a use value, he now regards the worker only as an *exchange value* in relation to the product. The historic process through which product and living labour come into this mutual relation is none of his concern. He is just as vague about the way in which this relation is perpetuated. Capital, with him, is the *result of saving;* this already shows that he misunderstands the process of its origins and reproduction. He therefore also imagines that production is impossible without capital, although he can very well imagine capital possible without ground rent. The distinction between *profit* and *surplus value* does not exist for him, proof that he is clear about the nature of neither one. His procedure already shows this from the very beginning. Originally, he makes workers exchange with workers -- and their exchange is then determined by the equivalent, by the labour time []{#p553} reciprocally expended in production. Then comes the real problem of his economics, to demonstrate that this determination of value is not altered by the accumulation of capitals -- i.e. by the presence \[*Dasein*\] of capital. Firstly, he has no inkling that his first spontaneous relation is itself only a relation abstracted from the mode of production resting on capital. Secondly, what he has available is a *definite amount of objective labour time,* which may of course increase, and he asks himself, how is it *distributed?* The question is rather how is it created, and there it is precisely the specific nature of the relation of capital and labour, or the specific and distinct character of capital, which explains this. As Quincey (X, 5) puts it, modern economics (the economics of Ricardo) is in fact concerned only with the dividends, while the total product is regarded as fixed, determined by the quantity of labour employed on it -- its value appraised in accordance with that.[^47] Accordingly, Ricardo has rightly been accused of not understanding *surplus value,* although his opponents understand it even less. Capital is represented as appropriating a certain part of the ready and available value of labour (of the product); the creation of this value, which it appropriates above and beyond the reproduced capital, is not presented as the *source* of the surplus value. This creation is identical with the appropriation of alien labour *without exchange,* and for that reason the bourgeois economists are never permitted to understand it clearly. Ramsay accuses Ricardo of forgetting that the fixed capital (which consists of capital not included in *approvisionnement,* with Ramsay the *raw material* at the same time along with the *instrument*) is a deduction from the sum total available for distribution among capitalist and worker. 'Ricardo forgets that the whole product is divided not only between wages and profits, but that another part is necessary for replacing fixed capital.' (IX, p. 88. R. 174, note.) Indeed, since Ricardo does not grasp the relation between objectified and living labour in its living movement -- \[a relation\] not to be deduced from the dividends of a given quantity of labour, but from the positing of surplus labour -- and does not, therefore, grasp the relation among the different component parts of capital, it therefore seems with him as if the entire product were divided into wages and profits, so that the reproduction of capital is itself counted as part of profit. Quincey (loc. cit. Notebook X, 5) gives this exposition of the Ricardian doctrine: 'If the price is 10s. then wages and profit as a []{#p554} whole cannot exceed 10s. But do not the wages and profits as a whole, themselves, on the contrary, predetermine the price? No, that is the old superannuated doctrine.' (p. 204). 'The new economics has shown that all price is governed by *proportional quantity of the producing labour,* and by that only. Being itself once settled, then ipso facto, *price settles the fund* out of which both wages and profits must derive their *separate dividends.'* (loc. cit. 204.)[^48] Capital here appears not as positing surplus value, i.e. surplus labour, but only as making deductions from a given quantity of labour. The fact that instrument and raw material appropriate these *dividends* then has to be explained by their *use value* in production, which then presupposes the absurdity that raw material and instrument create use value through their *separation* from labour. For this *separation* makes them into capital. Considered for themselves, they are themselves labour, accumulated labour. Besides, this clashes with sound common sense, because the capitalist knows very well that he counts wages and profit among the production costs and regulates the *necessary price* accordingly. This contradiction in the determination of the product by relative labour time, and the limitation of the sum of profit and wages by the sum of this labour time, and the *real determination of prices* in practice, comes about only because profit is not grasped as itself a derivative, secondary form of *surplus value;* the same is true of what the capitalist justly regards as *his production costs.* His profit arises simply from the fact that a part of the cost of production costs him nothing, hence does not enter into *his* outlays, *his* production costs.

[^1]:  Cicero, *Letters to Atticus, *Vol. V, 21, lines 10--13; Vol. VI, 1, lines 3--7; Vol. VI, 2, lines 7--10.

[^2]:  P.-J. Proudhon, *Système des contradictions économiques, *Vol. II, p. 265.

[^3]:  Latin plural of *iugerum, *a Roman measure of land.

[^4]:  Political animal; literally, city-dweller.

[^5]:  The term *Gemeinwesen* also carries the nuances 'common essence', 'common system' and 'common being'.

[^6]:  Aliens who resided in Athens but were not classed as citizens.

[^7]:  According to Roman tradition, Numa Pompilius was the second king of Rome.

[^8]:  Citizens of one Greek city-state who were granted full citizenship in another.

[^9]:  Antoine Cherbuliez (1797--1869, Swiss lawyer and economist, follower of Sismondi, although he added some elements of Ricardian theory), *Richesse ou pauvreté: Exposition des causes et des effets de la distribution actuelle des richesses sociales*, Paris, 1841, p. 16.

[^10]:  Bastiat et Proudhon, *Gratuité du crédit*, pp. 65--74. For Marx's later discussions of the polemic between Bastiat and Proudhon, see pp. 640--41, 754--8, 843--5.

[^11]:  Adam Smith, *Wealth of Nations, *Vol. III, Bk III, Ch. 4.

[^12]:  'This' refers back to 'manufacture'. See the definition of 'factory' given by Ure, cited by Marx on p. 690.

[^13]:  This statement is taken directly from Du Cange, *Glossarium mediae et infimae Latinitatis, *ed. G. A. L. Henschel, Paris, 1842, Vol. 2, p. 139, article entitled '2. Capitale'. However, Du Cange was wrong. The word ἀρχεῖα means 'government buildings', never 'loan' or 'principal sum of money owed' as suggested there; the Greek word for loan, which Du Cange probably had in mind, is χρέοϛ.

[^14]:  *métairie: *share-cropping, the modern *métayage. Bail de bestes à cheptel: *lease with livestock as capital. Cf. Du Cange, *Glossarium, *Vol. 2, p. 139.

[^15]:  'Those who have to pay a head tax'.

[^16]:  Adam H. Müller (1774--1829, leading advocate of the Romantic reaction in history and economics during the early nineteenth century; Austrian state official under Metternich, ennobled for his propagandistic activities), *Die Elemente der Staatskunst, Erster Theil, *Berlin, 1809, pp. 226--41.

[^17]:  'I shall grant a tenth part of my own to God both in livestock and in dead fruits of the earth', quoted by Du Cange, *Glossarium*, p. 140, from Athelstan's Ordinance of 925 on tithes.

[^18]:  See above, pp. 457--8.

[^19]:  '(false!)' was inserted afterwards, above the line. \[MELI note\]

[^20]:  In English in the original.

[^21]:  Marx's distinction between *Rohstoff *and *Rohmaterial *has no English equivalent. *Rohstoff *is the raw material in its pristine state, before being subjected to human labour; *Rohmaterial *is the raw material which has been formed by human labour but has yet to enter into the final product. Cf. *Capital, *Vol. I, Moscow, 1954, pp. 178--82.

[^22]:  See above, p. 402.

[^23]:  See above, pp. 256--7.

[^24]:  *par excellence.*

[^25]:  Cf. Hegel, *System of Philosophy, *I, *Logic, *para. 161: 'The concept remains at home with itself in its process; no new content is posited by the process, only an alteration of form is produced.'

[^26]:  Sismondi, *Nouveaux Principes d'économie politique, *Vol. I, p. 89. See above, p. 261.

[^27]:  ibid., Vol. I, pp. 91--2.

[^28]:  Cherbuliez, *Richesse ou pauvreté, *p. 64.

[^29]:  In Cherbuliez; raw material, instrument of labour, and supply of articles of consumption. See above, p. 299.

[^30]:  Cherbuliez, *Richesse ou pauvreté, *pp. 25--6.

[^31]:  William Thompson (1783--1833) was an Irish landowner who embraced Owenism, and criticized political economy from a utopian socialist position, but on the basis of Ricardo's doctrines.

[^32]:  'That', i.e. 'that situation'.

[^33]:  'Of the same' (*desselben*) probably refers back to 'recognition of nature (\[and\] practical power over nature)'. The contraction is ambiguous.

[^34]:  Storch, *Cours d'économie politique, *Vol. I, pp. 411--12.

[^35]:  Malthus, *The Measure of Value Stated and Illustrated, with an Application of it to the Alterations in the Value of the English Currency since 1790,* London, 1823, p. 17.

[^36]:  William Thompson, *An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth, Most Conducive to Human Happiness, Applied to the Newly Proposed System of Voluntary Equality of Wealth, *London, 1824, p. 176.

[^37]:  Ramsay, *An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, *p. 55.

[^38]:  Incidental 'false' expenses of production: the category into which the political economists from Adam Smith onwards relegated the cost of maintaining necessary but unproductive workers, e.g. soldiers, doctors etc.

[^39]:  Thomas de Quincey (1785--1859), the essayist, author of *Confessions of an Opium Eater, *was also a writer on political economy, and a follower of Ricardo.

[^40]:  Ramsay, *An Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, *p. 43. The references are to the page numbers of Ramsay's book. The quotations themselves are as usual in a mixture of English and German.

[^41]:  ibid., p. 55.

[^42]:  Misunderstandings on *Ramsay's *part (cf. Ramsay, *An Essay, *p. 22 n.) in which he followed Ricardo's own misunderstandings (cf. Ricardo, *On the Principles of Political Economy, *pp. 5, 7--8, 9).

[^43]:  Adam Smith, *Wealth of Nations, *Vol. I, pp. 101--2, 131--4.

[^44]:  Ricardo, *On the Principles of Political Economy, *pp. 338--9.

[^45]:  ibid., p. 3: 'In speaking of commodities ... we mean commodities ... on the production of which competition operates without restraint.'

[^46]:  ibid., p. 86.

[^47]:  De Quincey, *The Logic of Political Economy, *Edinburgh, 1844, p. 204.

[^48]:  De Quincey, *Logic of Political Economy, *p. 204.